Governor’s Introductory Letter

8

Executive Summary

I

Key Findings for 2030 Goals

VIII

Air Quality Control Commission Greenhouse Gas Subcommittee

IX

Near Term Actions by Sector

XV

Near Term Action by Venue and Timeline

XXII

Leadership and Innovation Required to Meet 2050 GHG Goal
Key Findings for 2050 Goals
Colorado Roadmap to Greenhouse Gas Pollution Reduction

XXIV
XXVI
1

Introduction

1

Vision

1

Background on Climate Science

5

Climate Change in Colorado

8

Disproportionate Impacts and Climate Equity in Colorado

14

Colorado’s Climate Equity Framework

16

Resilience Planning in Colorado

19

The Roadmap: Purpose and Process

21

Phase I - Developing the 2005 Baseline

26

Phase II - Building the Baseline and Early Policy Development

27

Phase III - Refinement of Policy Alternatives

30

Key findings

32

Near term Actions to Reduce Pollution

34

Summary of Near Term Action Plan

36

Electric Utility Sector

46

Clean Energy Plans and Voluntary Fossil-Plant Retirements

48

Regional Haze Rule

51

Transportation Sector

53

Zero Emission Vehicles

53

Clean Trucking Strategy and Fleet Rules

58

VMT Reduction Strategies

63

Indirect Source Rulemaking

67

Clean Fuels Standard

67

Aviation

69

Residential, Commercial and Industrial Fuel Use

70

Colorado’s Gas Utilities

70

Biogas Portfolio Standard and Leak Standards for Gas Utilities

72

Modernizing Gas Energy Efficiency Programs

73

Commercial Building Benchmarking and Performance Standards 74
Building Electrification Requirements for Utilities

74

Advanced Building Codes

76

Financing

77

Industrial Energy and Emissions Audit Requirements

78

Oil and Gas

79

Implementation of SB 19-181 & Minimizing Sector Emissions

79

COGCC Flaring Restrictions and Comprehensive Planning

81

Natural and Working Lands Greenhouse Gas Inventory

82

Natural and Working Lands Strategic Plan

83

Soil Health Program

84

Agricultural Climate Resilience Office

86

Natural/Working Lands Strategies in Rural/Urban Communities

86

ACRE3

88

Other Sectors

88

Coal Mine Methane Regulations

88

Methane from Landfills and Wastewater & Waste Diversion

89

HFC Regulation

90

Carbon Capture, Use and Sequestration

91

Governor’s FY 2021-22 Budget

92

Resource and Funding Considerations

93

Carbon Pricing Mechanisms

95

Reporting, Tracking and Management of Progress Adaptation

96

E3 Scenario Analysis

98

Colorado’s Emissions

98

Model Framework

99

Scenario Development

103

Sensitivity Analysis for Impacts of COVID-19 on the Economy

105

Scenario Results for 2025 and 2030

105

Leadership and Innovation Required to Meet 2050 GHG

116

Prior Action to Reduce GHG Pollution

123

Earlier Climate Plans

123

Clean Energy & Efficiency Legislation & Regulatory Actions

124

Progress under the Polis Administration

127

Renewables Roadmap

127

Recent Legislation

127

Electricity

128

Transportation

133

Buildings

140

Oil and Gas

145

Waste Diversion and Methane from Waste

146

Natural and Working Lands

148

Water Planning

153

Just Transition

153

Climate Equity Framework

154

Greening Government

155

Local Government Activities

156

Federal Government Activities

158

Federal Stimulus Investment

158

Transportation Policy

159

HFC Transition

160

Natural and Working Lands

160

Endnotes

162

ACRE3

Advancing Colorado’s Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Program

ACRO

Agricultural Climate Resilience Office of the Colorado
Department of Agriculture

AgEE

Agricultural Energy Efficiency program of the Colorado Energy
Office

APCD

Air Pollution Control Division of the Colorado Department of
Public Health and Environment

AQCC

Air Quality Control Commission

BE

Beneficial Electrification

CCEF

Colorado Clean Energy Fund

CCHS

Colorado Collaborative for Healthy Soils

CCUS

Carbon Capture, Use and Sequestration

CDA

Colorado Department of Agriculture

CDOT

Colorado Department of Transportation

CDPHE

Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment

CEO

Colorado Energy Office

CEP

Clean Energy Plan

CH4

Methane

CFS

Clean Fuel Standard

CO2

Carbon Dioxide

CO2e

Carbon Dioxide Equivalent

COGCC

Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission

CRO

Colorado Resiliency Office

CSG

Community Solar Garden

CCUS

Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage

DER

Distributed Energy Resource

DNR

Colorado Department of Natural Resources

E3

Energy + Environmental Economics Consulting Firm

EERS

Energy Efficiency Resource Standard

EPA

Environmental Protection Agency

ERP

Electric Resource Plan

EV

Electric Vehicle

HB 19-1261 Colorado House Bill 1261 (2019), the Climate Action Plan
HDV

Heavy Duty Vehicle

IECC

International Energy Conservation Code

IPCC

The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

JTAC

Just Transition Advisory Committee

LDAR

Leak Detection and Repair

LDV

Light Duty Vehicle

MDV

Medium Duty Vehicle

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

NWL

Natural and Working Lands

OJT

Colorado Office of Just Transition

PRPA

Platte River Power Authority

PUC

Public Utilities Commission

RPS

Renewable Portfolio Standard

SB19-077

Colorado Senate Bill 077 (2019)

SB19-181

Colorado Senate Bill 181 (2019)

SIP

State Implementation Plan

SLB

State Land Board

STIP

Statewide Transportation Improvement Program

TAG

Technical Advisory Group

TDM

Transportation Demand Management

VMT

Vehicle Miles Traveled

WAP

Weatherization Assistance Program

ZEV

Zero Emission Vehicle

Figure 1: 2020 CO GHG Emissions (MMT CO2e, AR5 100-yr GWP)

Page IV

Figure 2: Scenario Projections of Colorado’s Potential GHG Emissions

Page V

Figure 3: Representative Pollution Reductions in 1261 Targets Scenario

Page VII

Figure 4: Comparison of State Pollution Reduction Cases

Page XXI

Figure 5: Roadmap Development Process

Page 2

Figure 6: CO2 in the atmosphere and annual emissions (1750-2019)

Page 5

Figure 7: Global Air Temperature

Page 6

Figure 8: Change in Global Surface Temperature

Page 6

Figure 9: Colorado Statewide Temperature Anomalies

Page 8

Figure 10: Summer Temperatures in Colorado

Page 9

Figure 11: Observed Very Hot Days in Colorado

Page 10

Figure 12: Observed Very Hot Days in Colorado

Page 12

Figure 13: Colorado's Resilience Framework

Page 19

Figure 14: 2020 CO GHG Emissions (MMT CO2e, AR5 100-yr GWP)

Page 35

Figure 15: Comparison of State Pollution Reduction Cases

Page 36

Figure 16: Percent of Total Electric Sales in Colorado by Utility (2018 MWh)

Page 46

Figure 17: Colorado Electric Generator Capacity by Type and Year Installed

Page 47

Figure 18: Percent of Fossil Fuel Generation in Colorado by Plant Operator

Page 48

Figure 19: GHG Reduction Potential from CEO’s Electrification Report

Page 75

Figure 20: 2020 CO GHG Emissions (MMT CO2e, AR5 100-yr GWP)

Page 99

Figure 21: E3 Modeling Framework

Page 101

Figure 22: E3 GHG Emissions Projections by Scenario Through 2030

Page 106

Figure 23: E3 GHG Emission Projections by Scenario Through 2050

Page 107

Figure 24: Five Pillars of Decarbonization in Colorado by Scenario

Page 108

Figure 25: Emissions Reduction by Measure in 2030

Page 109

Figure 26: Electricity Generation through 2030

Page 110

Figure 27: Methane Emissions in Colorado’s Oil and Gas Sector by Scenario

Page 111

Figure 28: Vehicle Stock Rollover

Page 113

Figure 29: Heating Appliance Rollover in HB 1261 Targets Scenario

Page 114

Figure 30: GHG Emissions Reductions by Measure

Page 116

Figure 31: Total Electricity Demand by Sector and Scenario

Page 117

Figure 32: Electricity Generation in 2019 Action and HB19 1261 Targets Scenarios

Page 118

Figure 33: Total Final Energy Demand in 2050 by Fuel

Page 120

Table 1: Near Term Actions to Reduction GHG Pollution

Page XV

Table 2: Near Term Actions to Reduction GHG Pollution by Venue and Timeline

Page XXII

Table 3: Impacts of Climate Change in Colorado

Page 13

Table 4: Key Assumptions in the Reference and 2019 Action Scenarios

Page 28

Table5: Near Term Actions to Reduction GHG Pollution

Page 41

Table6: CO2e Reductions from Regional Haze Generating Unit Retirements

Page 52

Table 7: Emissions Reduction by Sector

Page 97

Table 8: Key Strategies by Sector in E3 Scenarios

Page 104

RECOGNITION
The State of Colorado thanks the many Coloradans who provided input
on the Roadmap throughout its development. A special thanks to the
Technical Advisory Group— Dr. Morgan Bazilian, Jill Cooper, Dr. Bryan
Hannegan, Jeff Lyng, Dr. Keith Paustian, Dr. Gabriella Petron, and Lee
White— for their generous support throughout the development process,
including discussions about modeling approaches and reviews of draft reports.
The state would also like to recognize the work of state climatologist Russ
Schumacher, who reviewed the comment draft and provided feedback on the
impacts of climate change in Colorado. Finally, Colorado would like to
recognize the support of Dr. Martin Keller for his role as observer to the
process.

Several additional materials related to the Roadmap have not been
included with the published version of the report but are available from the
Roadmap website. These additional online materials include the following
documents and technical appendices:
E3 Technical Appendix
The state hired Energy + Environmental Economics (E3) to model
potential pathways, or scenarios, that would make progress toward meeting
emissions reduction targets. E3 used its PATHWAYS model, which is built
using bottom-up data for all emissions produced and energy consumed in
Colorado, to model GHG emissions from all sectors of the economy and its
RESOLVE model to develop least-cost electricity generation portfolios. The
technical appendix provides greater detail about the modeling and the inputs
used to build these modeled scenarios.
State of Colorado Technical Appendix
During the course of the development of the Roadmap, the Air Quality
Control Commission and other stakeholders requested details on policies and
near term actions the state might take to meet the GHG reduction goals. The
state’s Technical Appendix outlines how state staff aligned the sector
emissions projections produced by E3 with the emissions reductions from near
term strategies that Colorado expects to pursue.
Roadmap Outreach Plan and Feedback
This document includes the Stakeholder Outreach Plan, a description
of the Technical Advisory Group, and the results of outreach activities.
Question and Answers on the Roadmap
This Q&A summary provides responses to the more frequently asked
questions about the Roadmap.

GOVERNOR’S INTRODUCTORY LETTER

When we began developing the Colorado Greenhouse Gas Pollution
Reduction Roadmap more than a year ago, the world looked very different.
Over the past 12 months, the global COVID-19 pandemic has changed nearly
every aspect of our lives, challenged our public health system, and strained
our economy. Coloradans have faced devastating consequences, from losing a
job to losing a loved one, and everything in between. We have seen firsthand
the impacts of a changing climate in our own backyard as we experienced the
worst wildfire season in Colorado’s history. Extreme, statewide drought laid
the foundation for these fires, and has made conditions even more
challenging for farmers, ranchers, our outdoor recreation industry, and many
other sectors of our economy.
But despite everything we’ve faced this year, our commitment to
climate action and clean air has not wavered. In fact, there is an even
greater sense of urgency. Looking forward, we know that clean energy will be
critical to helping us build a more sustainable and just economy as we begin
to recover from this pandemic. It’s not just about improving quality of life
today, but protecting the Colorado we know and love for generations to
come.
Thanks to Colorado’s history of leadership on clean energy, including
what we’ve accomplished together over the last two years, we are already on
a path to achieving half of the emissions reductions needed to meet our 2025
and 2030 targets. And to build on that momentum, this Roadmap identifies a
comprehensive set of actionable strategies that will help propel us toward
our goals. These near-term actions keep environmental justice and equity
considerations at the center, while reducing local air pollution, generating
economic growth, and creating high quality jobs.

One of my primary goals when announcing my candidacy for Governor
included a swift transition to 100% renewable energy by 2040, and since
taking office we have supported an unprecedented growth of renewables. By
working collaboratively with electric utilities that operate over 99% of the
fossil-based generation of emissions in Colorado, those utilities have
committed to reducing greenhouse gas pollution at least 80% by 2030, while
maintaining reliability and saving customers money. And we are building on
this expansion with a host of new policies, standards, investments,
innovations and partnerships across the economy.
Finally, I want to acknowledge the countless public stakeholders,
including members of our Technical Advisory Group, who provided invaluable
expertise and insight over the past 12 months, as well as the dozens of
employees who closely collaborated across state government and worked
tirelessly to finalize the Roadmap. To be successful we are going to need the
continued engagement and perspective from diverse stakeholders across the
state. We look forward to the critical work that lies ahead.

Jared Polis
Governor
State of Colorado

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

To address climate change, the Polis Administration has prioritized
action on a just and equitable transition to renewable energy and pollution
reduction that diversifies and strengthens our economy, creates good-paying,
local jobs, and improves the health and well-being of our communities. This
work is motivated by an imperative to protect the health and safety of all
Coloradans, as well as the unprecedented opportunity to drive innovation
and ensure prosperity for future generations.
In the 2019 legislative session Colorado passed House Bill 19-1261, the
Climate Action Plan to Reduce Pollution (“Climate Action Plan”),i which
includes science-based targets of reducing statewide greenhouse gas pollution
26% by 2025, 50% by 2030, and 90% by 2050 from 2005 levels. To ensure that
I

Colorado continues to make progress toward these targets, Governor Polis
directed state agencies to develop this comprehensive Greenhouse Gas
Pollution Reduction Roadmap (“Roadmap”).
As a result of prior policies, economic shifts, and legislative,
regulatory, and other actions taken by this administration, Colorado is
already on a pathway to achieving half of the emissions reductions needed to
meet the 2025 and 2030 targets. The Roadmap delivers a list of near term
actions the state will pursue over the next one to two years to make
significant progress toward the 2025 and 2030 Climate Action Plan goals. The
Roadmap also analyzes further actions that can help put the state on a solid
path to meeting the 2050 goal.
Reducing greenhouse gas pollution across our economy to meet the
state’s science-based goals will be no small task. While we have taken a
number of historic steps, we have much work to do to protect the Colorado
way of life for generations to come. This work will continue to be multifaceted and will require the ongoing expertise and engagement of all
Coloradans.
The Roadmap represents the work of many state agencies including the
Colorado Energy Office and the Departments of Agriculture, Natural
Resources, Public Health and Environment, and Transportation. Additional
support was provided by the Department of Local Affairs, the Colorado
Resiliency Office and the Office of Just Transition. Colorado hired Energy +
Environmental Economics (“E3”), a leading national consulting firm with
expertise in GHG modeling, to develop a model of the state’s economy-wide
emissions by sector. Technical staff from the Climate Change Unit at the
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment provided additional
analysis of projected emissions reductions from near term policy
recommendations.

II

The development of the Roadmap started in late 2019 with a review of
Colorado’s 2015 Greenhouse Gas Inventory, which was updated in 2019, and
an evaluation of the data used to project future GHG emissions for Colorado
in the Environmental Protection Agency’s State Inventory Tool. The state
agencies, in consultation with E3 and other outside experts from a Technical
Advisory Group, began gathering updated state-level data and refining
modeling methods to establish a more accurate accounting of greenhouse gas
emissions in Colorado in 2005. Among other changes to prior analyses, the
state agencies revised estimates of 2005 emissions from oil and gas
operations upwards from EPA stock assumptions to reflect more recent
scientific information about methane emissions.
Using this updated data and E3’s
modeling tools, the Roadmap team
constructed a Reference Case, which
represents a projection of the state’s GHG
emissions based on policies that were in
place prior to 2019. The Reference case
assumes no new policies or actions to
reduce emissions. That assessment found
that the four largest emitting sectors were
the same in 2020 as 2005. As shown below
in Figure 1, in 2020 transportation
displaced electricity generation as the
largest source of pollution. Electricity
generation, oil and gas production, and

Roadmap Modeling Cases
Reference Case

Modeled emissions reductions based on
all existing state policy prior to 2019

2019 Action Scenario

Modeled emissions reductions based on
prior state policy and legislative,
administrative, and voluntary actions
adopted in 2019

1261 Targets Scenario

Modeled an illustrative path Colorado
could take to meet the GHG reduction
targets in HB 19-1261,

fossil methane use in the residential,
commercial and industrial sectors remain the other three largest emitters. In
the transportation sector, passenger vehicles are the largest contributor to
emissions in the state. Electricity generation emissions largely come from
coal-fired power plants with a small portion from fossil methane gas-fired
III

power plants. Emissions from the oil and gas sector include fugitive methane
emissions from upstream and downstream operations in Colorado as well as
on-site combustion of fossil fuels in industrial operations.
Figure 1: 2020 CO GHG Emissions (MMT CO2e, AR5 100-yr GWP)

To better understand the impacts of recent policy changes, E3
evaluated projected pollution reductions resulting from legislation passed in
2019 and 2020 and from administrative actions to date by the Polis
Administration— The 2019 Action Scenario. This evaluation showed that
the state’s actions in the last two years to address climate change, when
added to prior actions, put Colorado on trajectory to achieve
approximately half of the emissions reduction needed to meet the 2025
and 2030 goals.

IV

Figure 2: Scenario Projections of Colorado’s Potential GHG Emissions

While the state has made significant progress toward meeting the 2025
and 2030 goals, the analysis showed that additional actions are needed to
reach the targets. E3 modeled an illustrative scenario, the HB 1261 Targets
Scenario, to represent one approach Colorado could take to meet the
Climate Action Plan targets through 2050. Based on these analyses, the
Roadmap proposes administrative, regulatory, legislative, procurement,
incentive-based, and other measures to reduce emissions in different sectors
of the state’s economy to achieve GHG pollution reductions in a costeffective and equitable way. Modeled Emissions Trajectories.
That path to reaching the state’s emissions goals builds on the
significant transition that is already underway toward clean, low-cost
renewable energy and will accelerate as we implement policies to shift the
way we move people and goods, and light and heat our homes and businesses
from fossil fuels to clean energy. A key to making equitable progress toward
our goals is to promote investments needed to modernize our economy more
V

quickly in disproportionately and historically impacted communities.
Transitioning toward a resilient, low carbon economy will require
investments, regulations, and other measures by the state as well as federal
and local governments. The transition also will require business investment
and leadership and the engagement of the nearly six million Coloradans who
own more than five million vehicles and almost 2.5 million housing units. The
Climate Action Plan provides the Air Quality Control Commission with
authority to consider progress made through all of these means as it considers
the need to develop regulations:

VI

Figure 3: Representative Pollution Reductions in 1261 Target Scenario to Meet 2030 Climate Goals

The Roadmap describes actions Colorado has taken to address climate
change, analyzes the current trajectory for GHG emissions, and presents a
suite of actions the state can pursue in the near term to make progress
toward the Climate Action Plan goals.

VII

Key Findings for 2030 Goals

● The largest sources of GHG pollution in Colorado are transportation,
electricity generation, oil and gas production, and fuel use in
residential, commercial and industrial spaces.
● Achieving Colorado’s 2025 and 2030 GHG emissions targets is feasible
with existing technologies but will require actions, laws, and policies
beyond those Colorado has taken already.
● Achieving the 2030 goals will rely on deep reductions in pollution from
electricity generation by continuing the transition to renewable
energy, as well as deep reductions in methane pollution from the oil
and gas industry, which makes up the largest source of non-combustion
emissions in the state.
● Making changes to transportation planning and infrastructure to reduce
growth in driving is an important tool.
● Electrification of end uses in buildings and transportation will play an
important role in achieving these targets, with action needed in the
near term to accelerate the transition.
● By 2050, very high levels of electrification of vehicles will be needed,
with nearly 100% of all cars on the road being electric and a 100%
market share for zero emissions trucks among new sales.
● Reducing methane emissions from landfills, sewage plants and other
sources, and enhancing waste reduction, recycling and diversion
efforts, is necessary, especially to reach emissions targets after 2030.
● Protecting, restoring, and enhancing the resilience of Colorado’s
natural and working lands is critical for sequestering carbon.
● Policy transitions to reduce GHG pollution will reduce air quality
burdens that disproportionately impact lower income communities and
communities of color.
● Policies will need to be designed carefully to ensure that benefits are
distributed equitably.
VIII

Air Quality Control Commission Greenhouse Gas Subcommittee
E3 provided a projection of Colorado’s GHG emissions and modeled
scenarios for how the state could reduce emissions in different sectors of the
economy, but was not tasked with developing detailed policy proposals.
During the development of the Roadmap, the Air Quality Control Commission
convened a GHG subcommittee to investigate near term strategies Colorado
could adopt to reduce GHG pollution in different sectors. This level of more
detailed policy development was originally intended to occur after the GHG
Roadmap was completed, but the state agencies agreed with AQCC and other
stakeholders that the presentation of more detailed near term action plans
will accelerate the transition and better enable Colorado to make progress
toward its goals. Those actions are now included in this Roadmap.
To support the AQCC subcommittee, the Air Pollution Control Division
(“APCD”) staff evaluated potential GHG reductions resulting from near term
AQCC rulemakings, PUC proceedings, legislative actions, and other
approaches. This spreadsheet-based analysis provides an assessment of
emissions reduction based on how the state is likely to implement policies
and adds to the level of analysis E3 provided in its scenario modeling. The
APCD’s analysis grouped emissions into three broad categories: Energy
Production (Electricity and Oil and Gas); Energy Consumption (Transportation
and Residential, Commercial, and Industrial fuel use); and Non-Energy
(Agriculture, Coal Mine Methane, Waste, HFCs) to evaluate emissions
reductions by policy approach in a sector. Energy production and consumption
encompass the largest emitting sectors and cover greater than 80% of
Colorado GHG emissions.ii
The APCD staff developed a spreadsheet tool that builds emissions
reductions from particular policies and actions based in sectors based on
where the greatest short-term emissions reductions were possible. The APCD
IX

approach reflects a more granular approach to developing individual
legislation, regulatory policy, and other approaches than E3 used in
developing its HB 1261 Targets Scenario.
As a result of the differences in approach, the APCD analysis presents
lower potential near term emissions reductions in certain sectors than E3
modeled in the HB 1261 Targets Scenario, but shows greater potential
reductions in others. In the residential, commercial, and industrial fuel use
sector APCD showed lower potential reductions based on assumptions about
the length of the transition for home and business owners to adopt heat
pumps and other lower emitting technologies. The difference in achievable
potential in transportation emissions is based on APCD using a more
conservative assumption about the number of electric vehicles that Colorado
consumers will buy under existing policies. APCD also assumed lower
reductions from coal mine methane than assumed in the HB 1261 Targets
Scenario. However, based on changes in the oil and gas industry and the
requirements of Senate Bill 19-181, the APCD tool shows deeper reductions in
the oil and gas sector for 2025 than E3 modeled in its scenarios.
The AQCC adopted a resolution establishing a process for review and
publication of metrics critical to tracking progress toward the statewide goals
established in HB19-1261.iii The resolution also adopted provisional sector
specific targets for 2025 and 2030 that are based on APCD’s work. The AQCC
is expected to finalize the resolution after the release of the Roadmap. The
table below shows the AQCC’s provisional targets, which are informed by the
near term actions identified in the Roadmap.

X

The E3 scenario analysis and APCD spreadsheet tool show that
reductions across multiple sectors of the economy provide pathways to
making progress towards the 2025 and 2030 targets. Based on E3’s HB 1261
Targets Scenario, this comprehensive approach also helps lay a strong
foundation for reaching the deeper reductions needed between 2030 and
2050. There is no single “silver bullet” solution; the modeling shows that a
“silver buckshot” approach of reductions across all the major sectors is
needed.
The analysis in the Roadmap finds that Colorado can meet its sciencebased GHG pollution reduction targets with existing technologies.
Decarbonizing the leading sources of pollution will require investments and
innovation as well as a broad suite of new policies, standards, and
partnerships.
Even as the state works toward an 80% pollution reduction in
electricity generation by 2030 through utility actions and enforceable electric
resource plans, Clean Energy Plans, and Regional Haze rules, there is a need
XI

to create incentives and pathways to spur further investment in pollution
reductions beyond 80%. During the rapid transition to clean, renewable
energy for the production of electricity, it is important to promote further
investment and innovation in the electrification of new sectors, such as
transportation and buildings. These efforts, along with increased energy
efficiency, will expand the impact of clean electricity across the economy.
With the transportation sector now being the leading source of GHG
emissions and a significant contributor to local air pollution that
disproportionately impacts lower-income communities and communities of
color, a key priority is to increase
the number of electric vehicles,
including trucks and buses, on
Colorado roads. Establishing new
standards that stimulate investment
and remove barriers to EV ownership
will make it easier and more
affordable to drive an EV.
Additionally, changing the way we
make development decisions,
including for land use, housing, and
infrastructure, can enhance accessibility, cut pollution, and reduce the need
to drive. To ensure that this transition is equitable and broad-based, the
state needs to develop policies and programs that will benefit communities
that have been most heavily impacted by the pollution from transportation
infrastructure, including highways and refineries.
Progressing towards the state’s GHG goals requires deep methane
emissions reduction from the oil and gas industry, landfills, sewage treatment
plants, coal mines, and other sources. Methane is a potent contributor to
climate change, with each ton creating 28 times more warming than a ton of
CO2 over 100 years (and even higher in the short term). Given the importance
XII

of achieving reductions of this potent greenhouse gas, the APCD staff
anticipate proposing regulations to the AQCC in 2021 that will achieve over a
30% reduction across the oil and gas sector by 2025 and over 50% (12 million
CO2e tons) by 2030. If adopted, these regulations will result in oil and gas
sector emissions of roughly 8 million tons in 2030, down from 20 million tons
in 2005.
Additionally, regulatory measures, such as those finalized in the
Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission Mission Change rulemaking,
that eliminate routine flaring, require equity-focused siting analysis,
minimize emissions, and prioritize vulnerable populations and
disproportionately impacted communities, are designed to make important
progress in GHG reductions and equity benefits.
The majority of Colorado homes and businesses use fossil methane gas
to heat water and indoor air. Fossil methane use is also a key source of
pollution from the industrial sector. To advance near term GHG goals,
Colorado needs to reduce fuel use in buildings and industrial processes
through increasing energy efficiency, transitioning water and home heating
and industrial operations to electricity where it is cost-effective, and
reducing the GHG intensity of the gas that serves these uses. In the
residential sector, this shift will provide additional co-benefits that include
more comfortable homes and better indoor air quality. Requiring utilities to
transition to lower emissions gas will create an incentive for investments in
the development of biogas from sources such as agricultural operations and
sewage treatment plants as well as spur investment in green hydrogen
production.
The state will also need to implement its actions to reduce HFCs
(refrigerants and aerosols), and advance climate-smart strategies on natural
and working lands. Colorado’s natural and working lands include our forests,
grasslands, agricultural croplands and rangelands, wetlands, riparian areas,
XIII

and urban greenspaces. Natural and working lands are both sources of GHG
pollution, including emissions from wildfires, agricultural equipment and
fertilizer use, and serve as carbon sinks by holding or sequestering carbon in
plants and soils. Colorado must work to increase access to energy efficiency
and renewable energy on farms and ranches by increasing utilization of the
Agricultural Energy Efficiency program and expanding the Advancing
Colorado’s Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency program. This program is
designed to achieve a number of goals, including supporting voluntary
participation in such efforts as Field to Market, Soil Health Partnership, and
Precision Agriculture programs, and protecting, restoring, and enhancing
carbon sequestration on farms, ranches, and other natural and working lands.
Colorado also needs to continue efforts to better manage waste
streams through diversion, composting, and other initiatives, especially for
organic wastes that can form methane in landfills. In 2019, recycling and
composting in Colorado reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 1.92 million
metric tons of CO2e, which is the one-year equivalent of either removing
407,000 cars from the road, or removing 148,000 homes from the grid, or
conserving 2.34 million barrels of oil or 113 million gallons of gasoline.
Because Colorado’s recycling and waste diversion rates have been below the
average of other states, recycling and waste diversion provide critical
opportunities to reduce emissions.
In coordination with the E3 modeling showing potential pathways to
achieve emission reduction targets, APCD and AQCC have engaged in a more
granular, bottom up process of evaluating the emissions reductions associated
with potential near term strategies and policy actions. The state has used this
analysis to develop a set of recommended regulatory, legislative and
programmatic strategies for enactment in 2021 and 2022.

XIV

Near Term Actions by Sector
The table below summarizes near term actions that the administration
will pursue to achieve sector specific GHG emissions reductions that help
Colorado make progress toward meeting the state’s climate goals.iv The
section on near term actions, starting at page 33 in the report, describes
these strategies in greater detail and explains why these strategies were
selected. As we pursue these steps, we will continue our commitment to
climate equity and environmental just through enhancing engagement with
stakeholders in disproportionately impacted communities; building on
partnerships with Sovereign Tribal nations through consultation and enhanced
engagement; and, reducing barriers to public participation in AQCC
rulemaking process. We will also build evaluation of potential equity impacts
into rulemaking processes and invest more resources in climate equity and
environmental justice.

Table 1: Near Term Actions to Reduce GHG Pollution
Targeted 2030
Sector

Near Term Actions

Emissions Reductions
From 2005 baseline
Million Metric Tons

● Adopt Clean Energy Plans and
Electric Resource Plans, including
evaluating plans using the full
social cost of carbon emissions.
Electricity

● Incorporate coal plant retirements
from utility commitments and
adopted utility plans into AQCC
Regional Haze rulemakings.

32.3 mmt

● Evaluate mechanisms such as
performance based regulation and
XV

other tools to create incentives
for deeper emissions reductions
and serving beneficial
electrification loads with zero
carbon generation.

● State GHG pollution standards for
transportation plans.
● Trip reduction/Transportation
Demand Management (TDM)
requirements and encouraging
telecommuting for large
employers.
● Clean trucking strategy with
multiple components including
infrastructure investments,
incentives for fleet turnover, and
evaluation of regulatory options.
More details are on page 57 of the
report.
Transportation

● Secure new revenue to fund
infrastructure and incentives to
transition to electric cars, trucks,
and buses.

12.7 mmt

● Offer incentives for land use
decisions by local governments
that reduce vehicles miles
traveled, reduce GHG and other
pollutants, and support greater
access to housing near jobs.
● Indirect source standards for
some types of new development.
● Expand public transit, including
front range rail and RTD
completing the statutorily
required Fastracks system that
XVI

voters passed in 2004 including
Northwest Rail (2025 Ridership:
8,600-10,100)..v
● Develop an EV Equity study to
ensure access to EV’s for all
Coloradans.
● Provide input into development of
new clean car standards by both
the federal government and for
state-based standards.

● Expand energy efficiency
investments from gas utilities to
support building shell
improvements.
Residential,
Commercial,
and Industrial
Fuel Use
(Gas utilities)vi

● Set carbon reduction targets and
biogas requirements for gas
utilities.
● Require large commercial
buildings to track energy use and
make progress toward energy and
pollution performance standards.

4.7 mmt

● Support adoption of advanced
building codes.
● Require regulated electric utilities
to create programs that support
customer adoption of electric

XVII

heat pumps and other forms of
beneficial electrification.
● Expand access to financing
programs for building retrofits by
capitalizing a green bank,
expanding existing programs and
advocating for utility on-bill
finance programs.
● AQCC action on industrial energy
and emission audits requirements
and Best Available Control
Technology requirements, setting
the stage for future performance
requirements.

Oil and Gas

Natural and
Working Lands

● AQCC rulemaking to achieve
methane pollution reductions
from the oil and gas industry - at
least 33% reduction in total
emissions by 2025 and over 50%
by 2030.
● COGCC implementation of new
rules that eliminate routine
flaring, require minimizing
emissions, and track preproduction and production air
emissions.

12.2 mmt

● Develop a comprehensive
emissions inventory.
● Develop a Natural and Working
Lands Strategic Plan.

1.0 mmtvii

● Increase producer utilization of
Agricultural Energy Efficiency
(AgEE) program.

XVIII

● Expand Advancing Colorado’s
Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency (ACRE3) program.
● Improve soil function and carbon
sequestration through
regenerative farming practices.
● Support voluntary participation in
such efforts as Field to Market,
Soil Health Partnership and
Precision Agriculture programs.

Waste

● Reduce methane emissions from
coal mines, landfills, sewage
treatment plants, and agriculture
through continued reductions in
coal extraction, utility biogas
incentivesviii, potential AQCC
rulemaking and grants for waste
reduction and diversion through
the Front Range Waste Diversion
Enterprise and CDPHE.

7.5 mmt

● Improve recycling end markets
and recycling and reuse.
Industrial
Process

● Federal HFC reduction provisions
adding to AQCC rules
(refrigerants, aerosols, etc.)

0.3 mmt

Emissionsix

XIX

● Advance the Governor’s FY 202122 budget, which includes a
number of innovative funding
proposals that will help protect
Coloradans from the existential
threat of climate change, improve
air quality, and position Colorado
to seize the economic benefits of
a renewable energy economy.
More detail on the budget is
included on page 92.
Other Actions

● Convene a task force on Carbon
Capture, Utilization and Storage
(CCUS) starting in mid-2021,
which will report to the Governor
within a year on recommended
framework, including policies and
actions steps for advancing CCUS
in Colorado.

0.3 tons

● Support local government and
private sector climate action
efforts.

The table above shows potential emissions reductions from the APCD’s
analysis by sector of the economy. In addition to creating a Target case for
emissions reduction achievable from the near term actions, the APCD staff
developed a Low and High case based on different assumptions about policy
implementation. The chart below shows that in 2030 the Target case results
in a 53% reduction compared to a goal of a 50% reduction (represented by the
solid black line). Even the Low case achieves a roughly 66 MMT reduction,
leaving a small emissions gap of less than 3% from the goal.

XX

Figure 4: Comparison of State Pollution Reduction Cases

XXI

Near Term Action by Venue and Timeline
The chart below provides a list of near term actions over the next two
years arranged by venue (e.g., regulatory agency or legislature) and by year
the state anticipates the action being initiated (unless noted otherwise).
Table 2: Near Term Actions to Reduce GHG Pollution by Venue and Timeline

Spring 2021

Summer
2021

Tri-State Electric
Resource Plan

Xcel Clean Energy
Plan

Xcel Renewable
Energy Plan

Xcel Transportation
Electrification Plan

Black Hills
Transportation
Electrification Plan

Black Hills
Energy
Efficiency Plan

Fall / Winter 2020
Public Utilities
Commission
(PUC)x

Fall 2021

Winter 2021

2022
Black Hills Clean
Energy Plan

Black Hills
Renewable
Energy Plan

Air Quality
Control
Commission
(AQCC)

Regional Haze Rules

Regional Haze Rules
Phase 2

Ozone Plan
Oil and Gas Well
Monitoring Rules
Outreach on 2021 Oil
and Gas Rules

Stakeholder
Processes for
Transportation,
Industrial, Oil and
Gas Rules

Transportation
Emission Rules
(GHG standards
for
Transportation
Plans and Trip
Reduction Plans)

Greenhouse
Gas emission
reduction
progress
evaluation

Transportation
Emission
Reduction Rules

Oil and Gas
Emission
Reduction Rules
Structures/
Building Emission
Reduction Rules

Industrial
Energy and
Emissions Audits
Rules

XXII

Colorado Oil
and Gas
Conservation
Commission
(COGCC)

Mission Change
Rulemaking:
200 Series - general
and record keeping;
300 Series - permitting
process;
400 Series - operational
practices;
500 Series - hearing
process;
600 Series - safety (and
residential setbacks);
800 Series underground injection
control wells;
900 Series environmental and
Exploration &
Production waste
management; and
1200 Series - wildlife
(and riparian setback).

Rulemaking: 700
Series - financial
assurance
(bonding);
Imposing permit
fee; and requiring
worker certification
(These three topics
complete
mandatory SB 19181 rulemakings.)

Other State
Agency Actions

Clean Trucking Strategy
Initiated

Convene taskforce
on Carbon Capture,
Utilization and
Storage

Just Transition Plan
Completed

Study on how to
incentivize progress
on land use
decisions
Climate Equity
Framework
Completed

Greenhouse
Gas emission
reduction
progress
evaluation, in
coordination
with CDPHE

Clean Trucking
Technical
Analysis
Completed

Natural and
Working
Lands Task
Force
Pathways
Analysis
Completed

Draft Natural and
Working Lands
Strategic Plan
Completed

Electric
Vehicle Equity
Plan
Completed

XXIII

Legislation

Transportation
● New revenue to fund infrastructure
and incentives to transition to low
and zero emissions cars, trucks and
buses.
Buildings and Gas Utilities
● Set carbon reduction targets for gas
utilities.
● Set biogas requirements for gas
utilities.
● Require existing large commercial
buildings to track energy use and
make progress toward energy and
pollution performance standards.
● Require regulated electric utilities to
create programs that support
beneficial electrification.
● Expand energy efficiency
investments from gas utilities.
Governor’s Proposed FY 21-22 Budget
Proposal
● Clean Energy Finance ($40 M)
● Wildfire relief, mitigation and
prevention ($78 M)
● Supporting local government
investment in renewables and
efficiency ($5 M)
● Climate Resilience Office at the CO
Department of Agriculture
● Building the capacity of Colorado’s
Office of Just Transition

Leadership and Innovation Required to Meet 2050 GHG Goal
The Roadmap not only models pathways to 2025 and 2030 GHG
pollution reductions but examines how Colorado can make progress toward
the longer term goal of meeting a 90% GHG pollution reduction by 2050. It is
important to recognize that the modeling gets more uncertain over this
longer time horizon and that the 1261 Targets Scenario for 2050 is best
viewed as an illustrative scenario showing one reasonable pathway toward
the state’s 2050 emission goals. This is particularly true given the
uncertainties in how technologies such as long duration energy storage, green

XXIV

hydrogen production, carbon capture utilization and storage, and advanced
biofuels will develop over the coming decades.

XXV

Key Findings for 2050 Goals

● All sectors have an important role to play in emissions reductions if the state is to reach 90%
reductions by 2050. Every sector that is a significant energy producer or consumer— including
electricity generation, oil and gas production, transportation, buildings and industry— would
need to achieve reductions of 90% to 100%.
● In the illustrative scenario, our two largest utilities, Xcel Energy and Tri-State, meet energy
needs with zero-carbon electricity by 2050 while smaller utilities reduce emissions 80%
compared to 2005 levels. This is a conservative assumption.
● In transportation, we will need to transition to close to 100% electric cars on the road by 2050
and 100% market share for new vehicle sales of zero emissions trucks and buses by 2050.
Achieving this will require close to 100% of new car sales to be electric by 2040. In addition,
we need to continue pursuing strategies that reduce vehicle miles traveled.
● Unlike the 2030 goal, achieving the 2050 goal likely will require further technical innovation
and economies of scale to bring costs down and allow deployment at scale in a number of
sectors. Important technologies may include green hydrogen, long duration energy storage,
carbon capture and storage, advanced biofuels, and synthetic fuels based on air capture of
carbon.
● In the buildings sector, the 1261 Targets Scenario for full decarbonization by 2050 is based on
a large-scale shift to the use of electric heat pumps, powered by zero carbon electricity, for
space and water heating. There may be other pathways, depending on technological
developments, which is why the near term actions support a wide variety of strategies for the
buildings sector.
● Land conservation, restoration, and climate-adaptive ecosystem management will be critical
for maintaining and enhancing resilient carbon sequestration on natural and working lands.
Achieving these activities at sufficient pace and scale will require significantly scaled up
technical assistance, research, and financial incentives.
● In agriculture, all sectors of the industry can adopt GHG reduction strategies in addition to
sequestration targets. The development of markets that pay producers for ecosystem services
may be an increasingly important tool to help producers remain viable while helping to reach
our shared climate goals.

XXVI

This Roadmap has been developed to meet the requirements of
Colorado Revised Statute § 24-20-111, which calls for development of a state
climate plan setting forth a strategy to address climate change and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, while taking into account previous state actions
and efforts as well as voluntary actions taken by the private sector and local
governments.

XXVII

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

28

COLORADO ROADMAP TO GREENHOUSE GAS POLLUTION REDUCTION

Introduction
Vision
Since 2004, when Colorado
became the first state to adopt a
voter-approved renewable energy
standard, the state has been at
the forefront of the renewable
energy transition. Governor Polis
ran on a platform of achieving
100% renewable energy by 2040,
reducing pollution and ensuring
that Colorado does its part to
confront the climate crisis.
Fighting climate change and reducing harmful air pollution protects the
health, safety, and welfare of all Coloradans today and for generations to
come. The transition to a cleaner and more just economy provides an
unprecedented opportunity to drive innovation and harness consumer and
economic benefits.
Over the past year, Colorado and the nation have grappled with a
number of profound challenges: the COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing
economic impacts, heightened attention to systemic injustices against Black,
Indigenous, and people of color, and historic fires driven by drought and heat
that have worsened from a warming climate. Despite these challenges,
Colorado’s commitment to renewable energy, climate action, and clean air
has not wavered. The investment it will take to build the clean, renewable
energy Colorado needs, to shift to cleaner trucks, buses and cars, and to
1

reduce energy use in homes and businesses is critical to building a more just
and equitable economy and society, protecting the health and safety of all
communities across the state, and safeguarding the Colorado way of life.
Figure 5: Roadmap Development Process

2005 Baseline Assessment
- Update to oil & gas
emissions
- Evaluate SIT tool

- Model Colorado emissions

Emissions Scenarios
- Reference case
- 2019 Action scenario
- 1261 Targets Scenario
- COVID-19 Sensitivity

Policy Development
- Review sector based

policies
- Consider public comment
- Revise policy planning

To better plan for and mobilize what Colorado can do to meet these
goals, the governor directed state agencies to work together to produce a
Roadmap to reduce greenhouse gas pollution. As shown in Figure 5, the
Roadmap process started with modeling and analysis. It then identified policy
actions and other steps the state can prioritize to meet GHG pollution
reduction and air quality goals. Those policy proposals were refined in
response to stakeholder feedback and are aligned with the equity framework
in this document.
We know that Coloradans are already experiencing negative impacts
from climate change and we know that Black and Latino Coloradans,
Indigenous people, lower-income residents, and those living near multiple
sources of pollution experience disproportionate impacts from pollution
linked with climate change. To promote equity and justice, the state must
work with impacted communities to intentionally and strategically design and
implement programs and policies that reduce GHG and invest in impacted
communities.
2

The state’s partnerships with the sovereign Nations of the Southern
Ute Indian Tribe and Ute Mountain Ute Tribe are an important component of
implementing the strategies found in this Roadmap. Strengthening
government-to-government relationships through formal consultation, staff
peer-to-peer information exchange, and enhanced stakeholder outreach and
engagement with members of the Tribes will support successful climate
action for all involved. Thoughtful consultation on sector-specific initiatives,
such as oil and gas regulation, electric vehicle charging infrastructure
investments, and renewable energy project development, will help ensure
that potential impacts of state GHG reduction policies and programs are
carefully considered.

3

State government cannot do this work alone. It is
going to take the commitment, expertise, and
engagement of Coloradans from diverse perspectives and
from across the state to further refine, mobilize, and
implement actions identified in this Roadmap. This work
involves transforming our collective approach to
powering, moving, heating and lighting in our state.
Achieving these goals will require action not only from
state government, but investments and actions from
individuals, businesses, and local governments.

GHG Pollution,
Air Quality,
and
Climate Justice
Reducing GHG emissions will
improve Colorado’s air quality
because many sources of climate
pollution are also responsible for
local and regional air pollution that
damages public health. Targeting
reduction to communities
historically most impacted will
further equity goals.
Transportation is not only the
top source of GHG pollution but is
also a leading source of nitrogen
oxides, one of the precursors to
ground level ozone, and particulate
matter, a damaging pollutant and
contributor to ozone. These
pollutants are concentrated in
places like North Denver and
Commerce City. Equitable investing
in EVs and EV infrastructure can
address this.
Oil and gas production is the
leading source of volatile organic
compounds (another ozone
precursor) and a top source of
methane, a potent greenhouse gas.
Reducing pollution from production
in Denver-Julesburg basin will
reduce ozone across the Front Range
and lessen related health impacts.
Hotter days, a direct result of
climate change, worsen the
formation of ground level ozone.
Addressing climate change and
working to mitigate temperature
increases can help address these
problems.

4

Background on Climate Science
Climate change results from certain gases, including carbon dioxide
and methane, absorbing energy from the infrared radiation emitted by the
Earth and trapping heat. This heat trapping effect, the “greenhouse effect,”
causes atmospheric warming resulting in changes to the climate, including
more frequent and intense extreme weather events.xi
Current measurements show atmospheric CO2 at 415 parts per million.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (“NASA”), concludes that
CO2 concentrations have increased 47% from pre-industrial levels.xii The
scientific consensus concludes that human caused emissions of greenhouse
gases, primarily from the burning of fossil fuels, is causing atmospheric
warming.
Figure 6: CO2 in the atmosphere and annual emissions (1750-2019). Source: NASA.

Figure 7 shows the change in average global air temperature (the thick
black line), which has increased since the 19th Century. The steepest
increases have come over the last half-century. The chart also shows that
5

average temperatures are warmer (in red) and warmer by increasing amounts
over that same period.
Figure 7: Global Air Temperature. Source: University of East Anglia.

Similar results of warming are shown in Figure 8 (below), which
represents the changes in global surface temperature compared to the
average temperatures from 1951-1980.
Figure 8: Change in Global Surface Temperature. Source: NASA.

6

The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(“IPCC”) Special Report on the Impact of Global Warming of 1.5°C concludes
that human activity is estimated to have caused a 1.0°C global temperature
increase by above pre-industrial levels. The IPCC report notes that climaterelated risks to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, and economic
growth are projected to increase with global warming of 1.5°C and increase
further with warming to 2°C.
According to the IPCC report, disadvantaged and vulnerable
populations, indigenous peoples, and communities that are dependent on
agriculture are at a disproportionately higher risk of adverse consequences
from warming. The IPCC report explains that lowering the levels of carbondioxide and other greenhouse gases starting immediately improves the chance
that global warming can be limited to 1.5°C and thus avert worsening
impacts. The report finds that delaying actions to reduce greenhouse gas
pollution increases the challenge and cost of meeting the goal of keeping
temperature increases to below 1.5°C. Further, not investing in loweremitting technologies risks locking in a greenhouse gas-emitting
infrastructure.

7

Climate Change in Colorado
Colorado’s climate is changing. The state has warmed 2°F since the
beginning of the 20th century.11 Colorado Climate Center analysis of National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”) data (Figure 9) shows that
over the last 30 years Colorado has experienced an increasing frequency of
hotter than average days as represented by the red bars on the graph. NOAA
states that,

Figure 9: Colorado Statewide Temperature Anomalies. Source: Colorado Climate Center.

“Average annual temperatures for Colorado have remained consistently
higher than the long-term average (1895–2015) over the past two decades.”xiii
In Colorado, nine of the twelve warmest years on record have occurred
since 2000. In addition, recent data from NOAA’s Center for Environmental
Information shows that Colorado’s summer temperatures over the last three
decades are the highest on record (Figure 9). The data also shows that
Colorado’s recent average summer temperatures are even higher than the
extreme heat of the 1930s Dust Bowl era.xiv In western Colorado, the
combination of heat and a lack of precipitation in the most recent three
8

monsoon seasons (July-August of 2018, 2019, and 2020) have been the worst
on record.
Figure 10: Summer Temperatures in Colorado. Source: CICS-NC and NOAA NCEI.

Data shows that not only are average days getting hotter, but that
Colorado is experiencing an increasing number of extreme heat days. NOAA
defines “very hot days” as having a temperature above 95°F. While NOAA
notes that temperatures vary across the state, it concludes that, “The
number of very hot days has been above average since 2000”xv as reflected in
Figure 11.

9

Figure 11: Observed Very Hot Days in Colorado. Source: Source: CICS-NC and NOAA NCEI.

Changes to Colorado’s climate from warming is causing an increasing
trend of heat waves, droughts, wildfires, and more frequent and severe
floods. In addition, the warming, along with other factors, has led to peak
runoff from snowmelt coming one to four weeks earlier. Earlier runoff is
increasing ecosystem stress through reduced stream flows, high
evapotranspiration rates, drier soils, and increasing disease prevalence.
Warming temperatures and drier soils also increase the likelihood of large
wildfires. The 20 largest wildfires in recorded history in Colorado have all
occurred since 2000, with the three largest burning in 2020. The record for
the largest amount of acreage burned— over 650,000 acres, was set in 2020.
Future estimates project that temperatures could rise an additional
2.5 to 5°F by 2050.xvi As a result of continued warming, Colorado is projected
10

to become more arid, increasing the severity of droughts and wildfires.
However, projections also indicate an increase in extreme precipitation
events because of increases in the atmospheric water vapor (due to rising sea
surface temperatures), which could result in more frequent and intense
flooding in the state.xvii
Rising temperatures and a changing climate will impact key natural
resources and environments in the state and industries that depend on them
such as farming, ranching and outdoor recreation.
Agriculture is a key driver of Colorado’s economy. According to a 2020
study, agriculture in Colorado is a nearly $47 billion industry that employs
195,000 people.xviii With more than 38,000 farms operating on more than 32
million acres of private land and 20 million acres of leased federal and state
land, the success of the state’s farms and ranches is tied to the health of
Colorado’s climate and land.xix As Colorado’s climate changes, Colorado’s
farmers and ranchers face increasing challenges. Earlier spring snowmelt is
decreasing instream flows in many basins and warmer and drier summers
means that even less water is available in the later part of the season. Hotter
days and warmer nights are increasing soil dryness, which will become worse
with time. Together, the changes that result from a warmer, dryer climate in
Colorado could reduce crop yields, force ranchers to reduce herd size, and
increase incidences of invasive weeds and pests. In addition, these impacts
will result in more and larger wildfires— in 2020 alone the state saw the three
largest wildfires in its history. The 2015 Colorado Climate Plan concluded
“the Colorado of the future is unlikely to look like that of the past.” xx
The state’s mountains and rivers are not only a symbol of Colorado,
but the ski resorts, parks, and gold-medal fishing waters are a leading source
of tourism, jobs, and revenue for the state. According to a 2018 report from
Colorado Parks and Wildlife,xxi outdoor recreation resulted in $62.5 billion in
spending and contributed $35 billion to the state's Gross Domestic Product.
11

The more than 500,000 jobs in
outdoor recreation represent
18.7% of the state’s employment.
But Colorado’s skiing is
vulnerable to decreased
snowpack and early melt,
reducing the number of skiable
days. Figure 12 shows that in
many parts of Colorado’s
mountains, spring snowpack is
declining, which may result in
fewer ski days and fewer
Figure 12: Colorado April Snowpack

mountain visits. In addition,
lower instream flow can increase
water temperatures impacting
signature fish species and
impacting gold-medal fishing
areas. In short, Colorado’s

outdoor recreation industries are vulnerable to the warming temperatures
resulting from the changing climate.

12

Table 3 summarizes key changes to Colorado’s natural resources from
climate change and some of the impacts that those changes will have.
Table 3: Impacts of Climate Change in Colorado
● Decreased snowpack and earlier runoff

Water

● Less water availability
● Lower water quality
● Risks of increased flooding
● Increased drought and drier soil

Soil

● Decrease crop yields
● Smaller herd size
● Increased insect, disease, and drought impacts on trees

Forest Health
and Wildfires

& crops
● Increased risk of wildfires
● Increased area burned
● Summer heat-related health risks
● Health impacts from higher ozone levels due to hot

Public Health

summer days
● Increased risk of asthma and other respiratory diseases
● Increased risk of vector-borne diseases
● Heat, drought, and reduced snowpack impact wildlife

Wildlife

populations
● Increases in invasive species

13

Disproportionate Impacts and Climate Equity in Colorado
House Bill 19-1261, Colorado’s Climate Action Plan, directs the AQCC
to identify communities disproportionately impacted by climate change to
ensure that the actions the state takes to reduce emissions include strategies
to reduce harmful air pollution affecting those communities. In identifying
these communities, the AQCC is directed to consider communities of color,
low-income residents, and tribal or indigenous populations. The statute also
identifies that disproportionate impacts may result from increased
vulnerability to environmental degradation, lack of opportunity for public
participation, or other factors. The AQCC is required to prioritize and direct
the benefits of regulatory compliance, including economic, health,
environmental, and resiliency benefits, to disproportionately impacted
communities. Furthermore, the statute requires the state to solicit
stakeholder input on advantages of different regulatory measures, specifically
soliciting input from disproportionately impacted communities, and requires
the state to evaluate any impacts of potential rules on those communities.
As Colorado designs policies to meet its GHG targets, the state must
recognize that the effects of air pollution and climate change on human
health, safety, and economic prosperity do not affect all people equally.
People of color, the sovereign Tribes in Colorado, lower-income individuals,
historically underrepresented groups, and those experiencing multiple

14

environmental burdens and social factors, such as systemic racism, are often
most severely impacted.
Studies show that lower-income individuals and people of color
experience increased health impacts and premature death due to exposure to
particulate matter in the
air.xxii Individuals and
families who may already
be dealing with chronic
health conditions,
inadequate healthcare or
insurance, or a lack of
access to trustworthy
information may be more
vulnerable to impacts from
air pollution and climate
change.xxiii Communities
that face impacts from pollution often face multiple impacts and a greater
frequency of more intense exposure to pollution— often including the
confluence of industrial facilities, highways, and other sources of air
pollution— and a correlation to higher frequency of upper respiratory health
problems and other dangerous health impacts. These communities frequently
face additional factors that compound the negative impacts of pollution like
homes with poor ventilation and, in the current environment, factors that
increase the risks associated with COVID-19, such as more crowded living
conditions, doing essential work, or working in occupation that cannot be
done remotely. Especially in communities with inadequate or poorly
maintained infrastructure, with less access to air conditioning, and with
greater reliance on public transportation for mobility, high levels of
particulate pollution, very hot days, and natural disasters can be dangerous,
or even deadly.
15

Greenhouse gas reduction policies and programs must be developed
with direct input and consideration from disproportionately impacted
communities, along with significant analysis to improve understanding of how
those policies will impact those communities. Climate action and air quality
improvement strategies that are informed by community concerns and
priorities, and that are designed creatively to promote equity and enhance
quality of life will encourage buy-in and result in lasting change.
CDPHE is using data mapping to identify impacted communities by
showing the geographic distribution of specific demographic data, cumulative
environmental burdens, and certain health conditions across the state. In the
map below, areas in darker red have higher impacts, often resulting from
experiencing a multiple of these factors. The data viewer will be a tool to
help the state prioritize community engagement efforts and be a lens through
which state agencies and stakeholders can consider potential impacts of
policy and regulatory decisions.
Colorado’s Climate Equity Framework
To ensure that climate policies and
programs effectively promote racial equity and
economic justice, they must be designed
intentionally and strategically and with input
from impacted communities.
The Climate Equity Framework is a
guidance document that helps identify
disproportionately impacted communities
across Colorado, based on statutory guidelines from HB 19-1261. The

16

Area in darker red
have higher health
and impacts.

Framework details best practices for effective outreach and
engagement. It also identifies ways to improve access to participation in
rulemaking processes, such as providing meetings and materials in common
spoken languages such as Spanish, providing evening meetings, and making
the public comment process as simple and convenient as possible. The
framework also provides a set of questions to be asked before rule concepts
and language are developed and during rulemaking proceedings to make sure
equity considerations are meaningfully demonstrated in the outcomes. CDPHE
will use the equity framework to guide processes at the AQCC and other
commissions. The Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission also
adopted regulations in November 2020 to incorporate environmental justice
into its permitting decisions. These measures are one part of the state’s
commitment to creating a foundation for equitable climate action.

17

Key equity principles shaping Colorado’s climate response:

Principle 1: Equitable Representation - The GHG policy process should make it
possible for any interested person to easily participate. Policies that impact
communities should be shaped by community input.
Principle 2: Prioritizing Benefits - For GHG reduction strategies with the potential
to provide direct benefits to individuals or communities, disproportionately impacted
communities should be prioritized.
Principle 3: Economic Impacts - GHG reduction strategies should reduce costs,
including currently externalized costs, and increase economic benefits, especially for
disproportionately impacted communities wherever possible.
Principle 4: Health Impacts - GHG reduction strategies should minimize negative
health impacts and improve health for disproportionately impacted communities.
Principle 5: Access to Solutions - GHG reduction strategies should ensure that clean
technologies are made available to everyone who wants them, in ways that make
sense for them.
Principle 6: Building Resilience - GHG reduction strategies should improve resilience
and quality of life for disproportionately impacted communities.

18

Resilience Planning in Colorado
Climate change poses one of the biggest threats to Colorado's
resiliency to future shock events and long-term stressors. With prolonged and
more intense drought, more frequent and larger wildfires, and more frequent
and intense flooding, climate change will continue to disrupt every part of
our communities if left unaddressed.
Colorado continues to plan for how to address these and other climaterelated threats. As a central part of this work, the Colorado Resiliency Office
updated the Colorado Resiliency Framework (“Framework”) in 2020.
Figure 13: Colorado’s Resilience Framework

With the release of the Framework in 2015, Colorado led the nation as
the first state to develop and implement a framework for holistically
addressing risks and vulnerabilities to acute shock events (like a wildfire or
19

pandemic) and long-term stressors (like climate change, housing affordability
or aging infrastructure), particularly those related to natural hazards
including wildfire, drought, and flooding.
With the five-year update in 2020, the Framework includes priority
strategies that address the impacts of Climate Change in three major areas of
focus: Risks from Natural & Other Hazards, Social Equity & Unique Community
Needs, and Economic Vibrancy & Diversity. The Framework contains an inner
circle of six overlapping resiliency sectors to be considered holistically in
developing resiliency solutions. As a result, the Framework's priority areas of
focus are defined as having Climate & Natural Hazard Resiliency, Building &
Infrastructure Sustainability, Agriculture & Food Security, Housing
Attainability, a Future-Ready Economy & Workforce, and Community
Capacity. These strategies will enable state departments and partners to:
● Identify and mitigate risk to Colorado communities
● Enhance resiliency planning and capacity in Colorado communities
through equitable engagement and regional collaboration
● Develop, align, and streamline policies to empower resiliency
● Create a culture of inclusivity that fosters resiliency, equity, and
holistic solutions, and an inherent sense of responsibility to one's
community
● Ingrain equity and resiliency into investments in Colorado

20

The Roadmap: Purpose and Process
In the 2019 session, the Colorado General Assembly passed 14 pieces of
legislation aimed at advancing clean energy and reducing the state’s
greenhouse pollution. House Bill 19-1261 the Climate Action Plan to Reduce
Pollution,xxiv concluded:

To reduce the potential that the state will see more severe impacts
from climate change, Colorado’s Climate Action Plan sets science-based
targets for GHG pollution reductions of 26% by 2025, 50% by 2030, and 90% by
2050 from a 2005 baseline, and delegates authority to the Air Quality Control
Commission to enact rules to make progress towards these goals. The statute
also directs the AQCC to include strategies designed to reduce harmful air
pollution affecting disproportionately impacted communities.
21

A key to equitable progress toward these goals is to promote the
investment needed to modernize the economy more quickly in
disproportionately and historically impacted communities. Transitioning
towards a resilient, low carbon economy requires investments, regulations,
and other measures by the state as well as federal and local governments. It
will also require business investment and leadership and the engagement of
the nearly six million Coloradans with more than five million vehicles and
almost 2.5 million housing units.
HB 19-1261 provides that the Air Quality Control Commission can
consider progress made through all of these means in developing regulations:
“The implementing rules may take into account other relevant laws and
rules, as well as voluntary actions taken by local communities and the private
sector, to enhance efficiency and cost-effectiveness, and shall be revised as
necessary over time to ensure timely progress toward the 2025, 2030, and
2050 goals.”

22

2019 Colorado Legislative Action Addressing Climate Change
Climate Policy
Senate Bill 19-096: Collect Long-term Climate Change Data
Requires the AQCC to collect and report on GHG pollution, forecast future emissions, and adopt a state-wide GHG
reporting rule by June 1, 2020 and to begin proposing rules to address emissions by July 1, 2020.
House Bill 19-1261: Climate Action Plan to Reduce Pollution
Establishes GHG pollution reduction goals of 26% by 2025, 50% by 2030 and 50% and 2050 from 2005 level. The bill allows
the AQCC to consider other actions, including other statutes, administrative or regulatory policies, local plans and rules,
and voluntary efforts as it promulgates rules to reduce pollution and ensure an equitable distribution of benefits.
Energy Efficiency
House Bill 19-1231: New Appliance and Water Efficiency Standards
Updates and adopts energy efficiency and water efficiency standards for certain appliances and plumbing fixtures.
House Bill 19-1260: Building Energy Code
Requires cities or counties to adopt one of the 3 most recent energy conservation codes when they update building codes.
Electric Vehicles
Senate Bill 19-077: PUC Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Programs
Starting in 2020, requires regulated electric utilities to file a plan every three years to invest in electric vehicle
infrastructure and to support customers’ investments in electric vehicles.
Senate Bill 19-239: Address Impacts of Transportation Changes
Required CDOT to convene and consult with a stakeholder group to examine impacts of new transportation technologies
and business models, identify means of addressing impacts, and report findings and make recommendations to the general
assembly (completed in 2019).
House Bill 19-1159: Modification to EV Tax Credits
Extends the tax credits for purchase of an EV or hydrogen fuel cell vehicle through 2025.
House Bill 19-1198: EV Grant Fund
Allows CEO to provide grants for and to offset operating costs for charging stations.
Modernizing Utilities and Oil and Gas Development
Senate Bill 19-181: Protect Public Welfare Oil and Gas Operations
Changes authority over surface impacts of oil and gas development and directs adoption of rules to minimize air pollution
from oil and gas operation and strengthen protections for health, safety and the environment.
Senate Bill 19-236: Public Utilities Commission (PUC)
Directs the PUC to use a social cost of carbon in utility resource planning, to investigate utility rates, utility regulatory
models, and the impacts of joining an organized electricity market. Requires the PUC to promulgate rules addressing
utility resource and distribution system planning. Requires utilities to submit a workforce transition plan when proposing
retirement of a coal-fired power plant. Requires Xcel Energy to file a plan to reduce carbon emissions by at least 80% by
2030 and permits other utilities to file plans to meet that target.
House Bill 19-1003: Community Solar Gardens Modernization Act
Increases the size of an individual community solar garden (CSG) to 5 megawatts and removes certain location
restrictions.
House Bill 19-1272: Housing Authority and New Energy Improvements
Clarifies that housing authorities may use the Colorado Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy(C-PACE) program to
finance energy improvements.
House Bill 19-1314: Just Transition from Coal-Based Energy Economy
Creates the Just Transition Office, provides support to coal workers, provides grants for communities impacted by the
coal transition, and requires electric utilities that propose to retire a coal-fired power plant to file a workforce transition
plan with the Just Transition Office.

23

Legislation enacted in 2019 also directs the AQCC to conduct enhanced
and more frequent collection of greenhouse gas pollution data from sectors
across the state’s economy and to report that data to the public. The data
reporting is to include historic emissions and an improved forecast of future
emissions. The ongoing tracking and reporting of emissions, including
projections of potential future emissions, will help ensure that Colorado
remains on track toward meeting its goals.
After the passage of this legislation, Governor Polis directed state
agencies to work together to develop a Roadmap for pollution reduction to
inform how Colorado can make progress toward the emission targets in the
Climate Action Plan. To achieve this goal, the Roadmap assesses the various
sources of the state’s greenhouse gas pollution and identifies policy actions
and other strategies Colorado can prioritize to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions while also reducing other air pollutants, cultivating a strong
economy, and addressing inequities in economic and health outcomes.
State agencies, including the Colorado Energy Office and the
Departments of Public Health and Environment, Agriculture, Natural
Resources, and Transportation, with additional support from other agencies,
worked together to develop the Roadmap. In addition, Colorado hired Energy
+ Environmental Economics, a leading national consulting firm, to provide
greenhouse gas modeling used in the Roadmap.
The development of the Roadmap included (i) an assessment of the
2005 baseline, (ii) the modeling of different emissions scenarios, and (iii) the
development of policies Colorado can implement with a focus on early action
to address the 2025 and 2030 GHG reduction goals.
The Roadmap evaluation finds that as a result of prior policies as well
as legislative, regulatory and other actions taken during the last two years,
Colorado is on a path to a greenhouse gas reduction of 13% in 2025 and 26% in
2030. The evaluation shows that additional actions are needed and the
24

Roadmap identifies administrative, regulatory, legislative, investment,
procurement, incentive-based, and other measures to progress towards the
2025 and 2030 GHG reduction goals in an equitable and cost-effective way.

25

Phase I - Developing the 2005 Baseline
The Climate Action Plan sets targets for GHG
pollution reductions measured from a 2005
baseline. The 2019 Colorado Greenhouse Gas
Inventory Update Including Projections to 2020 &
2030, which reassessed the state’s 2005 emissions,
identified that, “There is still considerable
uncertainty in much of the activity data, the
emission factors, and many calculation methods” of
the approach used in the modeling for that
report.xxv To resolve those issues and harmonize
E3’s modeling with the state inventory, the
development of the Roadmap began in December
2019 when state agencies and E3 began gathering
data and reassessing the 2005 baseline greenhouse
gas emissions inventory for Colorado. In addition,

Technical Advisor Group
Early in the process, the State sought input
and feedback from a Technical Advisory
Group:
Dr. Morgan D. Bazilian - Director, Payne
Institute, Colorado School of Mines
Jill Cooper - Senior Principal, Geosyntech
Dr. Bryan Hannegan - President and CEO,
Holy Cross Energy
Jeffrey Lyng - Director of Energy and
Environmental Policy, Xcel Energy
Dr. Keith Paustian - Distinguished Professor
Department of Soil and Crop Sciences,
Colorado State University
Dr. Gabrielle Petron - Research Scientist
NOAA ESRL Global Monitoring Division
Tracy Winfree - Senior Program Manager
CDR
Lee White - Managing Director Stifel Public
Finance

the agencies and E3 worked with a Technical
Advisory Group of Colorado-based experts (see
sidebar) to evaluate the design of the Roadmap
analysis, including model inputs and assumptions. The state also met with
other stakeholders conducting emissions modeling exercises to understand
the similarities and differences in their respective efforts. As part of this
process, the Roadmap team adjusted baseline inventories of oil and gas
methane emissions upwards to better reflect current scientific understanding
of emissions.
Additional documentation about the Roadmap process and technical
appendices are available from the Roadmap webpage.

26

Phase II - Building the Baseline and Early Policy Development
In early 2020, E3 began modeling the trajectory of Colorado’s
greenhouse gas pollution under a Reference Case Scenario. This reference
case models an emissions trajectory based on policies and actions taken prior
to 2019.
E3 also modeled a 2019 Action Scenario to show the GHG emissions
reductions from utility commitments, legislation, and administrative actions
taken since January 2019. This evaluation, initially done prior to the
COVID-19 pandemic, shows that Colorado is on course to achieve a 13%
reduction in GHG pollution by 2025 and nearly halfway to the 2030 target of a
50% reduction from 2005 levels. Because the 2019 Action Scenario showed
that Colorado needs to take additional actions to meet its goals, the state
directed E3 to model an illustrative target scenario that shows one possible
set of investments and transitions across the economy that meets the targets
established in the Climate Action Plan (1261 Targets Scenario).

27

Table 4: Key Assumptions in the Reference and 2019 Action Scenarios
Sector

Measure

Reference Scenario

2019 Action Scenario

Buildings and
Industry

Energy
Efficiency

Utility efficiency
programs; appliance
standards

2019 New Appliance
Standards (HB 1231)

CAFE Standards
Transportation

Electricity
Generation

Extended through 2026

Zero Emission
Vehicles (ZEVs)

Economic adoption
(EIA),
9% sales by 2030

Coal
Retirements

Planned retirements
(pre-2019
announcements)

Distributed
Solar
Carbon Targets

Navigant modeled scenario,
42% sales by 2030

Recent announcements
(Craig 2 and 3)

Projected trends in rooftop solar adoption

N/A

80% GHG Reductions by
2030, Tri-State and Xcel
targets by 2050, SB 236

Control
regulations

Post 2018 regulation impacts not currently modeled

Waste and
Refrigerants

Total Emissions

Grow with population, no measures

Agriculture and
Coal Mine
Methane

Total Emissions

Remain constant, no measures

Oil & Gas

Throughout the winter of 2019 and spring of 2020, the Roadmap team
continued meeting with members of the Technical Advisory Group to discuss
the on-going modeling efforts. In February, the state agencies also provided
the first of a series of regular updates on the status of the Roadmap to the
AQCC. These updates included a discussion of any revisions to methodological
assumptions, key findings, and potential policies the state might evaluate for
early action. AQCC provided time for public comment on the Roadmap at
each monthly meeting where the Roadmap team provided an update. In
28

addition to extensive written comments the AQCC also heard 23 public
comments in February, 66 comments in April, and 47 comments in October
regarding the draft Roadmap.
During this phase, the Roadmap project team began holding meetings
with different groups. Over the course of the development of the project
more than 60 meetings were held with groups representing local
governments, the Southern Ute Indian Tribal leadership and environmental
program staff, the Ute Mountain Ute Tribal environmental program staff, the
business community, environmental advocacy organizations, the outdoor
recreation industry, utilities, the oil and gas industry, mining, farmers and
ranchers, and organizations representing disproportionately impacted
communities.
Feedback from these meetings led to several changes in the report.
First, as the COVID-19 pandemic began to take hold, the Roadmap team
heard from many groups that the modeling needed to reassess certain
assumptions in light of changes to oil and gas development, driving habits,
and the state’s economy from COVID-19. The Roadmap includes this
sensitivity analysis, which is designed to show a reasonable potential of the
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the state’s overall GHG emission
trajectory. Also in response to feedback, the Roadmap team conducted
further review of the baseline emissions from oil and gas development,
ultimately revising the numbers to align with best current information and
practices.
The team also received feedback that the Roadmap should include a
more targeted assessment of pollution reduction from any specific policies
that the state is considering for early action to demonstrate that those
policies will ensure progress toward the 2025 and 2030 goals. That analysis is
now included in this report and referred to throughout as the state modeling
or Colorado modeling.xxvi
29

Phase III - Refinement of Policy Alternatives
During the course of summer 2020, E3 and state agency staff began the
third phase of the project, modeling emissions reductions across sectors of
Colorado’s economy that would enable the state to make progress toward
meeting the Climate Action Plan goals. The state team also began to evaluate
potential additional administrative, regulatory, legislative, procurement,
incentive-based, and other measures to advance toward the 2025, 2030, and
2050 GHG reduction goals in an equitable and cost-effective way.
Through the summer months the state staff continued providing
updates to an AQCC subcommittee and meeting with stakeholder groups.
State agencies held a virtual, online public listening session in August 2020.
More than 300 Coloradans joined the two-hour event, which was hosted in
Spanish and English. The state held a second listening session in October,
which over 200 people attended. Over the course of the Roadmap
development process, CEO received roughly 370 public comments through the
Roadmap webpage.
Throughout the process, the Roadmap has been developed to help
inform policy making and to ensure progress toward meeting the emissions
targets in the Colorado Climate Action Plan. Making progress toward these
emission targets will be a total state effort involving agencies and
departments across state government. It will also be iterative and multifaceted in nature and require a broad portfolio of investments, incentives,
and regulatory and legislative strategies. Because the state government
cannot do it alone, it is the intention to partner with a diverse array of local
governments and public and private partners.
The GHG Roadmap represents a significant step forward for climate
action and pollution reduction planning at the state level, advancing
Colorado’s policy and programmatic vision for pursuing timely, enduring and
equitable strategies. Progressing toward these goals will continue to be
30

iterative and multi-faceted, as continued engagement is encouraged from a
diverse set of stakeholders from across the state.

Community Engagement Highlights
~600 community members participated in feedback sessions
+2,200 emails received
+50 small group meetings held

31

Key findings
● The largest sources of GHG pollution in Colorado are transportation,
electricity generation, oil and gas production, and fuels use in the
residential, commercial and industrial space.
● Achieving Colorado’s 2025 and 2030 GHG emissions targets is feasible
with existing technologies, but would require actions, laws, and
policies beyond those Colorado has taken already.
● Achieving the 2030 goals would rely on deep reductions in pollution
from electricity generation by continuing the transition to renewable
energy, as well as deep reductions in methane pollution from the oil
and gas industry, which makes up the largest source of non-combustion
emissions in the state.
● Making changes to transportation planning and infrastructure to reduce
growth in driving is an important tool in reducing emissions.
● Electrification of end uses in buildings and transportation will play an
important role in achieving these targets, with action needed in the
near term to accelerate the transition.
● By 2050, very high levels of electrification of vehicles will be needed,
with nearly 100% of all cars on the road being electric and a 100%
market share for zero emissions trucks among new sales.
● Reducing methane emissions from landfills, sewage plants and other
sources, and enhancing waste reduction, recycling and diversion
efforts, is also necessary, especially to reach emissions targets after
2030.
● Protecting, restoring and enhancing the resilience of Colorado’s
natural and working lands is critical for sequestering carbon.
● These transitions will reduce air quality burdens that impact lower
income communities and communities of color disproportionately.
● In each of the sectors, policy will need to be carefully designed to
ensure that benefits are distributed equitably.
32

The policies in this Roadmap build on earlier commitments Colorado
made to address the climate crisis, including leading the transition to
renewable energy, adopting aggressive goals for clean and electric vehicles,
and passing legislation to clean up or retire coal-fired power plants. This work
would not have been possible without a strong partnership among the General
Assembly, public interest groups, private sector leaders, local governments,
and the public. The findings in this Roadmap are supported by the analysis
conducted by E3 and the additional work done by the state Air Pollution
Control Division.

33

NEAR TERM ACTIONS TO REDUCE POLLUTION

The Roadmap incorporates and builds on the existing legislation and
policy framework. The Roadmap assesses the sources of the state’s
greenhouse gas pollution and identifies a series of policy actions the state can
take to reduce GHG pollution. The report focuses primarily on near term
action, meaning action that may be implemented over the next one to two
years to make progress toward Colorado’s 2025 and 2030 GHG targets. The
Roadmap also considers a range of other actions that help ensure that
Colorado is on a pathway to meet its 2050 target of a 90% reduction in GHG
pollution from its 2005 level.
The plan presented here was developed with the help of ten months of
conversations with disproportionately impacted communities, community
leaders, Colorado’s farmers and ranchers, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe, the
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, faith groups, business leaders, environmental
organizations, industries affected by the transition, and other Coloradans.
State agencies received feedback on a wide array of topics, including
recommendations on how to model GHG pollution and what policies should be
considered to reduce those emissions.
Making progress towards Colorado’s 2025 and 2030 GHG pollution
reduction goals is feasible but will require continuing the transition to
renewable electricity generation to achieve an 80% reduction below 2005
levels by 2030, reducing methane emissions from the oil and gas sector more
than 50% by 2030, increasing investments in energy efficiency and expanding
electrification of buildings and industry. Reducing pollution from
transportation requires a transition to electric vehicles and reductions in
VMT, but by the end of the decade will also require expanding the use of
clean fuels such as biogas. The state will also need to seek reductions in non34

combustion GHGs, through leak reduction from fossil gas utilities and oil and
gas development, waste diversion to minimize organics in landfills, and
through capture of biogas from sources like landfills, wastewater treatment
plants, and farms. Significant reductions in methane emissions from the oil
and gas industry may also be necessary. The following diagram shows the
major sources of GHG pollution in Colorado.
Figure 14: 2020 CO GHG Emissions (MMT CO2e, AR5 100-yr GWP)

35

Summary of Near Term Action Plan
Colorado’s largest four sources of GHG pollution are transportation,
electricity generation, oil and gas, and fuel use in buildings and industry.
As shown in figure 15 (below), two sectors— electricity generation and
oil and gas— account for approximately two thirds of the total 2030
reductions needed to reach the state climate goals.

Figure 15: Comparison of State Pollution Reduction cases

Colorado projects a 32 million ton reduction in emissions from
electricity and a 12 million ton reduction in emissions from the oil and gas
industry under the near term action plan. These sectors play such a large role
in the near term reductions for several reasons. First, each is a large source
of current emissions. Second, reductions can be achieved at a reasonable cost
with existing technology. Third, in each of these sectors the majority of the
emissions come from a small number of emitting sources. This can be
contrasted with the transitions that are necessary to achieve savings in the
36

built environment and transportations sectors, which will come through the
actions of millions of Coloradoans making individual decisions and
investments.
For electricity, the dramatic decline in the cost of wind, solar, and
battery storage has made deep emissions reductions possible, often at a cost
savings. The costs of new utility scale wind and solar, with some associated
battery storage, are lower than the cost of operating existing coal
generation. This shift is allowing utilities to retire coal generation and
replace it with wind, solar and storage, using existing natural gas generation
(or in some cases small additions of gas combustion turbines) as backup to the
renewables. There is high confidence that the state’s utilities can achieve the
target of at least an 80% reduction by 2030 without significant rate increases
to their customers. The six utilities that operate more than 99 percent of the
state’s fossil-fired generation, Xcel Energy, Tri-State Generation and
Transmission, Colorado Springs Utilities, Platte River Power Authority, Black
Hills Energy, and Holy Cross Energy, have already committed to resource
plans that meet or exceed an 80% GHG reduction by 2030.
The state is not proposing to require reductions greater than 80% by
2030 across the board, although it is hopeful that the 80% reductions might be
reached earlier or exceeded by 2030. Despite the low costs of renewables,
getting all the way to 100% carbon free generation across the entire state will
require some combination of technological development and price declines
for long duration storage and firm zero carbon generation as well as broader
access to regional markets for electricity and greater integration of flexible
demand into the grid. Despite these challenges, some utilities have
committed to deeper, cost effective reductions by 2030. Platte River Power
Authority has adopted a plan for 90% reductions and Holy Cross Energy has
committed to 100% carbon free power by 2030. State agencies will engage in
the PUC process to consider Xcel Energy and Tri-State’s electric resource and

37

clean energy plans to help ensure the maximum level of cost effective
emissions reductions.
The oil and gas production, processing, and transmission sector has
many opportunities to reduce methane emissions at relatively low cost. The
E3 analysis found a cost of only $4/ton CO2e. Many leading oil and gas
producers have made environmental, social, and governance commitments
that include reducing methane emissions to 0.2% of production volume by
2025. Major advances have been made towards the ability to do continuous
emissions monitoring. Based on the commitments made and technologies
available, setting a regulatory requirement for a greater than 50% emissions
reduction by 2030 is feasible. This will result in a roughly 12 million ton
reduction by 2030. A CDPHE-led stakeholder process will allow a full
exploration of how best to structure this requirement, leading to an AQCC
rulemaking in late 2021.
The other two largest sources of emissions (transportation and fuel use
in buildings and industry) are very different in character from electricity and
oil and gas. The reductions in transportation are comparable in magnitude to
those from oil and gas, approximately 12 million tons CO2e by 2030, but
about half of this is from the gradual turnover of older to new cars and trucks
that meet existing federal and state vehicle emissions standards. The future
actions in the near term action plan will lead to approximately 6 million tons
of additional reductions by 2030. The reductions from fuel use in buildings
and industry will be about 4.7 million tons by 2030.
Reducing emissions from vehicles and fuel use in buildings and industry
will require changes to transportation planning and land use decisions made
not only by the state but by numerous local governments. The transition will
also require millions of individuals and businesses to make decisions about
how they travel, the vehicles they use, and about energy use in their homes
and businesses. These are not sectors that can be addressed through
38

overarching rules or emissions caps. While there is a role for regulation in
areas such as vehicle standards, requirements for gas and electric utilities to
support end use energy efficiency and electrification and make use of biogas,
industrial energy and emission audit requirements, and building codes and
performance standards, many of the necessary changes will require incentives
to encourage action, public investment, outreach and education and industry
leadership through efforts such as national-scale electric vehicle production.
These sectors also have a relatively long stock turnover time, with cars
lasting 15 years or longer, trucks often being used for decades, and the time
between major upgrades of buildings often being in the decades. Because of
this, it is important to begin action now. Even though the emissions
reductions from these near term actions will be relatively modest in the near
term, they will grow to become very significant in the period after 2030.
The near term action recommendations also target reductions in
methane emissions from waste through expanded waste diversion, recycling,
and incentives and regulations targeting capturing and using waste methane.
Emissions reductions from capturing and using methane are shown in the
buildings and industrial fuel use category, since they will primarily displace
fossil methane use in these sectors. The large reduction in emissions in the
waste category (7 million tons) comes mostly from reductions in coal mine
methane. This is because active mines emit far more than inactive mines, so
as demand for coal drops and mines close, methane emissions drop
significantly. The state agencies also received substantial feedback from a
variety of stakeholders that the Roadmap should more actively address
carbon capture utilization and sequestration (CCUS). The state is planning to
create a task force to examine issues related to the potential development of
CCUS in Colorado.
We also know that natural and working lands have an important role to
play but are not yet able to quantify the impact of policies in this area. We

39

are pursuing a portfolio of measures to enhance our understanding and begin
action in these areas.
Finally, in every one of these areas it is important to address how they
can be implemented in an equitable manner. This needs to be addressed in
each policy, but also in a holistic way, and the state intends to pursue
strategies designed to enhance the opportunities for key stakeholders from
disproportionately impacted communities to provide input and help design
these policies.
We also note that many stakeholders have pointed out that while there
is a high level analysis of the marginal costs of emissions abatement, the
Roadmap does not provide a detailed cost benefit analysis for each regulatory
proposal. This is true, but inevitable for such a broad analysis. As each
proposal is brought to the appropriate regulatory body, the policy will be
subject to the full review process required for adoption including costs and
benefits. For example, under state law, rules brought to the AQCC will
require rigorous regulatory and economic impact analysis, and participating
parties may request full cost benefit analysis as part of the process.
Table 5 presents a summary of the near term actions by sector that the
administration will pursue (this table also appeared in the Executive
Summary). These actions are discussed in more detail in this section following
the table.

40

Table 5: Near Term Actions to Reduce GHG Pollution
Targeted 2030
Sector

Near Term Actions

Emissions Reductions
From 2005 baseline
Million Metric Tons

● Adopt Clean Energy Plans and
Electric Resource Plans, including
evaluating plans using the full
social cost of carbon emissions.

Electricity

● Incorporate coal plant retirements
from utility commitments and
adopted utility plans into AQCC
Regional Haze rulemakings.

32.3 mmt

● Evaluate mechanisms such as
performance based regulation and
other tools to create incentives
for deeper emissions reductions
and serving beneficial
electrification loads with zero
carbon generation.
● State GHG pollution standards for
transportation plans.

Transportation

● Trip reduction/Transportation
Demand Management (TDM)
requirements and encouraging
telecommuting for large
employers.
● Clean trucking strategy with
multiple components including
infrastructure investments,
incentives for fleet turnover, and
evaluation of regulatory options.
More details are on page 57 of the
report.

12.7 mmt

41

● Secure new revenue to fund
infrastructure and incentives to
transition to electric cars, trucks,
and buses.
● Offer incentives for land use
decisions by local governments
that reduce vehicles miles
traveled, reduce GHG and other
pollutants, and support greater
access to housing near jobs.
● Indirect source standards for
some types of new development.
● Expand public transit, including
front range rail and RTD
completing the statutorily
required Fastracks system that
voters passed in 2004 including
NW rail (2025 Ridership:8,60010,100).xxvii
● Develop an EV Equity study to
ensure access to EV’s for all
Coloradans.
● Provide input into development of
new clean car standards by both
the federal government and for
state-based standards.

42

● Expand energy efficiency
investments from gas utilities to
support building shell
improvements.
● Set carbon reduction targets and
biogas requirements for gas
utilities.
● Require large commercial
buildings to track energy use and
make progress toward energy and
pollution performance standards.
Residential,
Commercial,
and Industrial
Fuel Use
(Gas
utilities)xxviii

● Support adoption of advanced
building codes.
● Require regulated electric utilities
to create programs that support
customer adoption of electric
heat pumps and other forms of
beneficial electrification.

4.7 mmt

● Expand access to financing
programs for building retrofits by
capitalizing a green bank,
expanding existing programs and
advocating for utility on-bill
finance programs.
● AQCC action on industrial energy
and emission audits requirements
and Best Available Control
Technology requirements, setting
the stage for future performance
requirements.

43

Oil and Gas

Natural and
Working Lands

● AQCC rulemaking to achieve
methane pollution reductions
from the oil and gas industry - at
least 33% reduction in total
emissions by 2025 and over 50%
by 2030.
● COGCC implementation of new
rules that eliminate routine
flaring, require minimizing
emissions, and track preproduction and production air
emissions.

12.2 mmt

● Develop a comprehensive
emissions inventory.
● Develop a Natural and Working
Lands Strategic Plan.
● Increase producer utilization of
Agricultural Energy Efficiency
(AgEE) program.
● Expand Advancing Colorado’s
Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency (ACRE3) program.

1.0 mmtxxix

● Improve soil function and carbon
sequestration through
regenerative farming practices.
● Support voluntary participation in
such efforts as Field to Market,
Soil Health Partnership and
Precision Agriculture programs.

Waste

● Reduce methane emissions from
coal mines, landfills, sewage
treatment plants, and agriculture
through continued reductions in
coal extraction, utility biogas
incentivesxxx, potential AQCC

7.5 mmt

44

rulemaking and grants for waste
reduction and diversion through
the Front Range Waste Diversion
Enterprise and CDPHE.
● Improve recycling end markets
and recycling and reuse.
Industrial
Process

● Federal HFC reduction provisions
adding to AQCC rules
(refrigerants, aerosols, etc.)

0.3 mmt

Emissionsxxxi
● Advance the Governor’s FY 202122 budget, which includes a
number of innovative funding
proposals that will help protect
Coloradans from the existential
threat of climate change, improve
air quality, and position Colorado
to seize the economic benefits of
a renewable energy economy.
More detail on the budget is
included on page 92.
Other Actions

● Convene a task force on Carbon
Capture, Utilization and Storage
(CCUS) starting in mid-2021,
which will report to the Governor
within a year on recommended
framework, including policies and
actions steps for advancing CCUS
in Colorado.

0.3 tons

● Support local government and
private sector climate action
efforts.

45

Electric Utility Sector
Colorado’s utility sector is composed of 54 electric utilities and 12 gas
utilities that provide the electricity and fossil methane that heat our homes
and businesses and power the state’s economy. As shown in the previous
table of near term actions, the largest single opportunity for near term
reductions is in the electricity sector, where the Roadmap is targeting an 80%
reduction, or 32 million tons, below 2005 emissions levels by 2030. Utilities
representing more than 99% of the state fossil generation have already
committed to resource plans that meet or exceed an 80% GHG pollution
reduction by 2030.
Xcel Energy is the state’s largest electric and gas utility. As shown in
Figure 16, Xcel accounts for roughly 52% of the state’s electricity sales.
Colorado Springs utility and Platte River Power Authority (“PRPA”) are the
second and third largest retail utilities in the state with a combined sales
share of roughly 14%. Tri-State Generation and Transmission provides
electricity to other utilities across Colorado and three other states.
Figure 16: Percent of Total Electric Sales in Colorado by Utility (2018 MWh)

46

As shown in the figure below, Colorado has historically depended on
coal-fired power plants to provide electricity. Starting in the 1990s, the state
saw more investment in gas-fired generation. Then, in 2004, with the passage
of a renewable portfolio standard, Colorado began to see increasing
investment in wind and solar. As investments in wind and solar grew
nationally and prices declined, the state saw additional growth in renewable
resources. Colorado is positioned to further this transition by accelerating the
retirement of fossil-fired generation, reducing GHG emissions, and meeting
renewable generation goals.
Figure 17: Colorado Electric Generator Capacity by Type and Year Installed

Based on a recent analysis by the Colorado Energy Office, roughly 99%
of the fossil-fired generation in the state is operated by only five utilities:
Xcel Energy, Tri-State, Colorado Springs, PRPA, and Black Hills.

47

Figure 18: Percent of Fossil Fuel Generation in Colorado by Plant Operator (2019, MWh)

Clean Energy Plans and Voluntary Fossil-Plant Retirements
The current legal and regulatory framework in Colorado creates a
pathway for the state’s electric utilities to reach an 80% reduction in carbon
emissions from 2005 levels by 2030. Legislation passed in 2019 requires
Colorado’s largest investor owned utility, Xcel Energy, to file a Clean Energy
Plan with the Public Utilities Commission. The PUC ordered Xcel Energy to file
its plan no later than March 31, 2021. By law, a Clean Energy Plan must
demonstrate an 80% reduction in CO2 emissions associated with the utility’s
Colorado sales in 2030, as measured from a 2005 baseline. Because a CEP is
part of the utility’s resource planning, the Clean Energy Plan will include
power plant retirements and additions through 2030. The PUC can also
consider whether it is economically beneficial to retire fossil-fired power
plants earlier than scheduled retirement dates. Because of legislative
changes in 2019, the retirements and additions will be evaluated, in part,
using a social cost of carbon, which quantifies the impacts of GHG pollution
and will therefore make it more expensive for a utility to use fossil fuel fired
48

power plants. Legislative changes in 2019 also authorized Xcel Energy to
utilize a loan refinancing mechanism known as securitization, that could
create savings for the benefit of ratepayers, communities, and workers
directly impacted by the early retirement of fossil-fired power plants.
Colorado’s second largest utility, Tri-State Generation & Transmission,
submitted a resource plan to the PUC in December 2020 that targets an 80%
reduction in emissions from the generation that serves load in Colorado. In
the evaluation by the PUC of Tri-State’s resource plan, the full social cost of
carbon is required to be taken into account.
The combination of a 2030 GHG pollution reduction target and the
potential for any utility to file a Clean Energy Plan provides an important
framework to implement enforceable emissions reductions. Under the Clean
Energy Plan statute, other utilities are permitted to file with the PUC Clean
Energy Plans (CEPs) that meet the minimum target of

Major Colorado
utilities with
commitments to
meet clean energy
goals of an 80% GHG
emissions reduction
by 2030:

reducing GHG emissions 80% by 2030. A utility with an

Black Hills Electric

Power Authority has adopted a resource plan that will

Colorado Springs
Utilities
Platte River Power
Authority

approved CEP that demonstrates that they will achieve
these reductions is given a “safe harbor” from further
regulation of GHG emissions through 2030. The
administration has worked with utilities to adopt plans that
achieve at least an 80% emissions reduction. Platte River
achieve a 90% emissions reduction by 2030 and Colorado
Springs Utilities has adopted a resource plan that will
achieve an 80% reduction. Holy Cross Energy has committed
to 100% carbon free power by 2030. In January of 2021
Black Hills announced its intent to file a clean energy plan

Tri-State G&T

that will achieve an 80% pollution reduction by 2030. The

Xcel Energy

administration continues to work with these utilities to file
these plans as CEPs, making these voluntary commitments

49

enforceable to achieve deep pollution reductions and a quick transition to
renewables.
Through the mandatory and voluntary filing of CEPs, a clear and
complete picture of the ongoing transition of the Colorado electric utility
sector will be publicly available and tracked to ensure the electricity sector
achieves emissions reductions consistent with the modeling performed for
this report. For those utilities not filing CEPs, the APCD will monitor ongoing
reduction efforts to evaluate the need and benefits of pursuing any AQCC
regulatory action needed to meet the state’s goals. The APCD will include its
evaluation of utility reduction efforts as part of the tracking included with
the GHG Dashboard.
There may be opportunities to create additional regulatory
mechanisms that can provide incentives for utilities to make even deeper
GHG emissions reductions. For investor owned utilities, performance based
regulation may be one option. Traditional utility regulation creates an
incentive for a utility to make large capital investments such as building new
power plants. Under a performance based regulatory framework, a utility
earns based on achieving specific outcomes determined by state regulators.
Such outcomes can include cost performance, meeting state pollution
reduction or environmental goals, just transition outcomes, and
environmental justice goals. Because performance based regulation is
outcome driven, it may better enable the creation of financial mechanisms
that can drive utilities to seek deeper GHG pollution reductions or incentivize
the use of zero carbon resources to serve new electrification loads. There
may also be other mechanisms that could be explored to incentivize deeper
reductions, including from utilities whose rates are not regulated by the PUC.
The implementation of CEPs and the movement away from coalpowered electricity in the state also has significant benefits for human
health. Reducing the co-pollutants from coal combustion, including
50

particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), Sulphur dioxide (SO2), ozonegenerating oxides of nitrogen (NOx), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
will improve health conditions such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and other respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. These conditions
are aggravated by exposure to the co-pollutants of coal combustion and are
experienced more frequently by communities of color and low-income
Coloradans.
Regional Haze Rule
Several of the announced early retirement dates for coal-fired electric
generating units in Colorado will become codified through inclusion in
Colorado’s Regional Haze State Implementation Plan (“SIP”), providing legal
certainty that these retirements will take place. The federal Regional Haze
rules call for state and federal agencies to work together to improve visibility
in 156 national parks and wilderness areas across the United States. In
Colorado, there are 12 “Class I” areas that fall under the Regional Haze rule.
EPA approved Colorado’s first 10-Year Regional Haze SIP in 2012. Colorado’s
next Regional Haze SIP is due to EPA in July 2021. The AQCC has completed
rulemaking that includes closure dates for 11 sources, mostly electric
generating units at power plants around the state and a coal mine on the
western slope. The intent is not to supplant the resource planning function of
the utility governing boards and the PUC, but rather to take the coal plant
retirement dates that have been established through these processes and
incorporate them into the regional haze plan, making them enforceable. The
projected emission reductions from these closures are up to 35,773 tons per
year for visibility impairing pollutants (NOx, SO2, and PM). While the SIP is
focused on these pollutants, it will have the co-benefit of locking in the
associated GHG pollution reductions.
The table below (Table 6) projects an annual CO2e reduction of 21.7
million metric tons per year from coal plant retirements included in the
Regional Haze rulemaking. The state bases these calculations on the
51

facilities’ most recent representative three years (2016-2018) of operation.
The retirements included in the Regional Haze SIP are not inclusive of all
changes in the electric sector. The type and quantity of replacement
resources and transmission improvements will likely be determined through
each utility's resource planning process. We note that this does not yet
include either the recent announcement from Xcel Energy that it plans to
retire Hayden Unit 1 in 2028 and Hayden Unit 2 in 2027 or any additional or
accelerated retirements that Xcel Energy may propose or that the PUC may
require as part of Xcel Energy’s March 2021 Clean Energy Plan. These changes
likely would be included in the second phase of the Regional Haze rule at the
AQCC.
Table 6: CO2e Reductions from Regional Haze Generating Unit Retirements
Facility/Unit

CO2e Reduction
(metric tons)
4,275
601,866
175,343
446,247
755,376
2,090,251
2,287,504

Closure Date

Utility

1/1/2017
9/1/2017
9/1/2019
12/31/2022
12/31/2022
12/31/2022
12/31/2025

2,821,418

9/30/2028

Cherokee Boiler 4
Rawhide Unit 1
Nixon Unit 1
Craig Unit 3

1,427,354
1,963,468
1,242,179
2,445,888

12/31/2028
12/31/2029
12/31/2029
12/31/2029

Colorado Springs
Xcel Energy
Tri- State
Colorado Springs
Colorado Springs
Xcel Energy
Xcel Energy
PacifiCorp, Platte
River Power
Authority, Salt
River Project, TriState Generation
and Transmission
Association, and
Xcel Energy
Xcel Energy
Platte River Power
Colorado Springs
Tri-State

TOTAL

20,364,765

Metric tons

Drake Unit 5
Valmont
Nucla
Drake Unit 6
Drake Unit 7
Comanche Unit 1
Comanche Unit 2
Craig Unit 2

52

Transportation Sector
The state is targeting a 12.1 million ton reduction from transportation
by 2030. E3 projects that approximately half of this, 6 million tons, is the
result of prior vehicle emissions policies which are resulting in older vehicles
being replaced by cars and trucks built that meet current fuel economy and
emissions standards. Despite the rise in population and vehicle miles
traveled, the vehicle improvements required under these policies are
resulting in modest reductions in GHG emissions. The state projects that the
other 6 million tons will come from additional actions, including public
investment, incentives, changes to transportation planning designed to
reduce the growth of vehicle miles traveled, regulatory requirements, and
increased adoption of zero emissions cars, trucks and buses.
Zero Emission Vehicles
The transportation sector is the single largest source of GHG pollution
both nationwide and in Colorado. Nearly 60% of these emissions come from
light-duty vehicles— the majority of cars and
trucks that Coloradans drive every day.
Pursuing the near-complete electrification of
these vehicles by 2050, with an interim target
of nearly 1 million light-duty EVs in service by
2030, will significantly reduce the state’s
overall GHG emissions while reducing harmful
pollutants, saving consumers money, and
producing complementary benefits to the state’s rapidly decarbonizing
electrical grid.
In April of 2020, the state released an updated Electric Vehicle Plan
that establishes goals for zero emission vehicle adoption statewide, including
having at least 940,000 EVs on the road by 2030 (including at least 1,000
transit vehicles), reaching near full electrification of the light-duty fleet by

53

2050, and reaching 100% zero emissions from new medium- and heavy duty
fleets by 2050.
Because light duty vehicles tend to remain on the road for ten years or
more, the plan identifies a number of strategies designed to increase
consumer awareness, ensure equity in access to EVs, and continue the build
out of the charging and fueling infrastructure needed to support widespread
EV adoption. Achieving near full electrification by 2050 will require that EVs
make up a high share of new vehicle sales in prior decades. To enable
consumers to more confidently shift to EVs, potential regulatory action along
with a number of complementary state actions will be essential, including
ensuring consumer incentives to bring down the initial purchase price of
vehicles, building out a statewide network of charging stations to ensure that
EV drivers are able to easily access charging when needed, and accelerating
the turnover of fleet vehicles, including in government fleets, to more rapidly
get the oldest and most polluting vehicles off Colorado roads. Together, these
actions will be critical to meeting the emissions reductions in the
transportation sector.
It is critical that the transition to EVs provide benefits to low and
moderate income Coloradans as well as rural and disproportionately impacted
communities. While some benefits are universal— all of us benefit from lower
levels of GHG pollution— other benefits, such as reduced fueling and
maintenance costs and better vehicle performance are specific to those
driving EVs. Lower levels of local air pollution and vehicle noise are specific
to geographical areas with greater levels of EV adoption.
In 2021, the Colorado Energy Office will be conducting a stakeholder
process leading to a study on EV Equity that will baseline, define, and map
frontline communities that are or may be disproportionately affected by
transportation pollution or experience barriers preventing their ability to
equitably access electric transportation or the benefits of transportation
54

electrification. The report will assess barriers to EV adoption and will
examine strategies to remove those barriers. Transportation air pollution,
including MDV and HDV emission impacts, will be evaluated and summarized
via mapping. Criteria to evaluate and prioritize potential programming, with
stakeholder engagement, will be developed.
With this context in mind, the following set of strategies will be
pursued in the transportation sector to achieve the GHG emissions reductions
necessary to make progress toward the 2025 and 2030 targets.
● Post-2025 Clean Car Standards: In November 2018, the AQCC adopted
Regulation 20 on Low Emission Vehicle (“LEV”) standards for new light
and medium duty vehicles sold in Colorado beginning in model year
2022. With that action, Colorado joined twelve other states and the
District of Columbia in adopting California’s vehicle standards under
Section 177 of the Federal Clean Air Act. Currently, regulations
requiring improvements in vehicle efficiency or Zero Emission Vehicle
adoption beyond 2025 are not in place at either the federal level or in
California. It is likely that both the federal government and California
will soon pursue post-2025 standards. Colorado could adopt any future
California standards as a means to reach deeper emissions reductions
after 2025. The state can participate in the development of California
and federal standards. Because adoption of policy in Colorado is
contingent on California or the federal government adopting new
standards that do not exist yet, it is likely a few years out before
Colorado could consider updating its regulations. For those reasons,
post-2025 vehicle standards are not included in the summary chart.
However, the state will actively engage in rulemaking proceedings to
help shape federal or state-based standards in the near term and will
then make a decision on whether the new federal standards meet
Colorado’s needs or whether the state should initiate a rulemaking at
the AQCC to adopt the state-based standards. The state’s active
55

engagement in shaping future standards is included in the summary of
near term action.
● EV Incentives for Consumers, including Low-Income Consumers:
Current EV tax credits in Colorado are only available for the purchase
or lease of new vehicles. Many consumers, particularly those in lowerincome communities, are not able to use these incentives. Further,
individuals and households must have the ability to carry these costs
until they can be credited on the following year’s taxes. Establishing
new incentives that cut across electrification of multiple modes will
help spread the benefits of transportation electrification more
equitably to all Coloradans. Enabling incentives to be applied at the
point of sale or lease will also ensure that these incentives can
meaningfully reduce costs for Coloradans. One example of this
approach comes from a recent PUC proceeding in which the Colorado
Energy Office proposed that Xcel Energy, the state’s largest utility,
offer to its customers a rebate on new or used vehicles that would
apply through the dealer at the time of purchase or lease. The
proposal includes a recommendation to earmark a percentage of
available rebate funds for used vehicles and for income-qualified
households and would provide a larger rebate for income-qualified
customers. The PUC approved a roughly $110 million TEP, which
included $5 million in vehicle rebates for lower-income customers.
● Electric Bikes and Micromobility: The Colorado Energy Office is
currently developing a pilot electric micromobility project to provide
electric bikes and scooters to lower-income essential workers who have
been negatively impacted by COVID-19-related public transit
disruptions. This pilot project could result in subsequent scaling of this
model potentially through legislation.

56

● EV Charging Infrastructure Incentives: Colorado has supported the
build-out of publicly-accessible EV charging infrastructure at
workplaces, public buildings, and along major travel corridors for years
through the Charge Ahead Colorado and Alt Fuels Colorado programs
and must continue to do so as the adoption of EVs grows statewide.
Particular emphasis must be placed on filling gaps on the state highway
network to allow for longer-distance travel and addressing the greater
charging requirements needs of medium and heavy duty vehicles. In
addition, installing chargers at multi-family housing will remove a
significant barrier to EV access and allow renters and some lowerincome individuals to more easily transition to EVs. Increasing the
number of public DC fast-charging stations will provide those without
access to home charging the ability to purchase an EV.
● Local Government EV Planning: While state regulatory and policy
efforts to plan for and deploy zero emission vehicles and infrastructure
are vital, local action by counties and
municipalities is also needed. Some
Colorado communities have taken the lead
in developing vehicle electrification plans
and investing in implementing those plans.
However, many local governments lack the
roadmap needed to begin making progress.
State agencies can help local governments
in taking this critical first step by providing grants, tools, and technical
assistance for transportation electrification planning.
● Public Investment in Clean Vehicles and Infrastructure: Significant
public investment will be needed to support electrification of medium
and heavy duty vehicles. These include investment in infrastructure as
well as vehicle purchase incentives. In addition, investment will be
needed to both accelerate light duty vehicle electrification and to
57

make it equitable, through mechanisms that could allow lower-income
Coloradans with old and inefficient cars and small businesses with
older trucks to upgrade to electric vehicles or other zero emission
vehicles. The level of funding that will be required to achieve the
transition to high levels of zero emissions vehicles is unlikely to be
available through the state general fund, and instead would need
bondable and sustained long term revenue mechanisms that could be
considered either as a standalone clean transportation measure or as
part of a broader transportation funding package.
Clean Trucking Strategy and Fleet Rules
In July 2020, Colorado joined a
multistate memorandum of understanding
on zero emissions trucks. The Department
of Transportation, along with CDPHE and
CEO, announced plans to develop an allof-the-above strategy to reduce pollution
from medium and heavy duty
transportation. With transportation now
the largest source of air pollution in
Colorado— and with our economy
increasingly reliant on freight, as
exemplified during the COVID-19 crisis— it
is critical that we develop a thoughtful
and balanced approach that provides a
pathway for emissions reductions from
medium and heavy duty vehicles. The
draft strategy includes a suite of ideas
that will be evaluated comprehensively, including through stakeholder input
and in-depth technical evaluation, to determine the most impactful and
reasonable actions. Possible actions include:
58

● Getting older vehicles off the road, especially replacing them with
electric vehicles
● Providing incentives for cleaner trucks
● Planning for the fueling needs of zero emission trucks
● Building partnerships with fleets for short- and long-term planning
● Training people to maintain and repair new transport technologies
● Leading by example and working with other states to explore
possibilities together
● Considering potential regulatory strategies such as fleet rules or the
Advanced Clean Truck rule
As motor carriers have noted, decades-old diesel trucks, manufactured
prior to the enactment of more recent federal emissions standards for
medium and heavy duty trucks, play an outsized role in current fleet
emissions of particulates and nitrogen oxides. The federal government
strengthened vehicle standards beginning with Model Year 2014, and a
second, stronger set of federal standards was scheduled to take effect in
Model Years 2018 or 2021, depending on the class of vehicles. Accelerating
opportunities for fleet turnover within the conventional truck fleet,
including diesel emissions reduction strategies, and continuing to pursue a
variety of strategies to ensure that the diesel fleet is as clean as possible,
should be an important component of a clean truck strategy. Colorado is
exploring a number of opportunities to design and support a public-private
partnership program that focuses on displacing high emitting diesel trucks
with cleaner models, especially emissions free. This should be structured to
increasingly reward models that meet the most rigorous emissions standards,
with the major focus on advancing zero emissions vehicle adoption.
As zero emission vehicle truck technologies, including electrification
and hydrogen fuel cells proliferate, their success will depend on a robust
network of charging and fueling infrastructure. Developing infrastructure to
support zero emission vehicles in medium and heavy duty fleets is critical to
59

their success and the state is working with utilities and other industry
partners to identify a strategy for supporting this sector with charging and
fueling infrastructure.
Infrastructure improvements include incorporating clean technologies
into key freight corridors and highway projects and developing a strategy for
medium/heavy duty ZEV fueling infrastructure along these critical routes.
These strategies include features such as runaway truck ramps and signage to
designate steep grades and other safety concerns, and it should also
incorporate improvements that facilitate cleaner trucking— be it fueling
infrastructure or elements that can help reduce pollution along those
corridors, including a careful look at the siting for charging and hydrogen
fueling infrastructure, working with impacted communities, utilities, and
industry partners. Considering that many of Colorado’s freight corridors and
industrial centers are located in close proximity to lower-income and
disproportionately impacted communities such as Commerce City and North
Denver, careful attention must also be paid to ensuring that these
communities are early beneficiaries of cleaner and quieter medium and heavy
duty electric vehicles.
State agencies are exploring opportunities for cleaner fleets by
engaging with major fleet owners to discuss how best to support large scale
transition to ZEV fleets, including identifying what vehicle classes work best
for early adoption and what complementary policies can support fleet
transition. The state is also working with shippers and carriers to explore
acquisition of refrigerated trailers with electric standby units as well as
having the necessary charging system to support those units at distribution or
receiving sites. While major fleet operators control the purchase decisions for
a large portion of the medium and heavy duty vehicles in operation in
Colorado, the trucking industry is dominated by very small companies, 91.3%
of which operate six or fewer trucks.xxxii These small companies often
purchase used vehicles and the state will need to closely consider their needs
60

when designing purchase incentives to ensure that small fleets can also
benefit from the efficiency and lower maintenance costs of electric vehicles.
Reducing emissions from last mile freight delivery and pickup will be
an important part of meeting transportation emissions reduction targets. Both
locally and on the internet, home and business deliveries have increased
substantially, a trend that has only increased since the coronavirus pandemic,
and downtown business areas have been particularly affected. As we seek to
reduce emissions in our downtowns, diminish congestion and make these
areas more multimodal and pedestrian-friendly, it is important to work with
logistics companies and businesses on a series of strategies to achieve those
objectives. These include the greater adoption of cleaner and zero emission
vehicles, use of routing optimization software, providing advanced parking
solutions for deliveries, establishing freight consolidation centers,
encouraging off-peak deliveries, and creating strategies to reduce dwell time
and idling. As in other elements of the Clean Trucking strategy, particular
emphasis should be taken to ensure that disproportionately impacted
neighborhoods surrounding freight hubs are prioritized for early adoption of
EVs and charging infrastructure.
As manufacturers introduce new ZEV technologies into the medium and
heavy duty market, we must explore all options to ensure that Colorado truck
consumers have access to innovations that are being made available
elsewhere in the country. Thus, as other states explore Advanced Clean Truck
regulations, Colorado is beginning an analysis of its own to evaluate the
benefits and any drawbacks of joining the program, as well as potential
regulatory flexibilities that may be allowable under the Clean Air Act
should Colorado pursue rulemaking.
CDOT, in collaboration with CDPHE and CEO, will engage in stakeholder
discussions and have contracted with M.J. Bradley & Associates, a leading
national consulting firm, to do a technical and economic analysis of the
61

potential for ZEV adoption in Colorado. The M.J. Bradley study, in
conjunction with stakeholder input, will be used to inform a decision on what
regulatory proposals will be submitted to the AQCC. The study should be
completed in summer of 2021, with regulatory consideration at the AQCC in
2022. Any formal rulemaking proposal could include potential fleet rules
requiring fleets above certain size thresholds to transition to ZEVs. In
addition, Indirect Source rules, as described later in this section, could
support ZEV adoption as a mechanism for mitigating emissions associated with
some types of development.
Moving toward ZEV vehicles will require investments on the part of
truck dealers, private repair shops, and fleets with their own on-site
maintenance. These groups will need to retrofit or upgrade their facilities to
perform maintenance on newer vehicle technologies and train mechanics and
other personnel to service them. The state must begin working with and
assisting truck dealerships and private maintenance shops in supporting
workforce development that will be necessary for successful ZEV
implementation. This could be part of a larger workforce development effort
targeted at increasing the number of mechanics and technicians and
supporting curriculum development at our vocation and technical schools. It
is critical that the state work with these different maintenance operations on
how we can better support the movement toward more ZEV trucks.
In addition to ZEV efforts, there are a number of existing strategies to
improve the fuel economy of traditional diesel trucks that will also improve
the efficiency and range of electric vehicles. The state can encourage private
fleets to become involved in the SmartWay Transport Partnership, a
collaborative program among logistics companies and the EPA. The program
helps companies to adopt and implement technologies and strategies that will
reduce emissions and improve fuel efficiency, including methods like
aerodynamic packages and low rolling resistance tires.

62

The state is committed to “walking the talk” and will take a leading
role toward reducing emissions from medium and heavy duty trucks, both
in its own fleet and with those private fleets with which it conducts
business through green procurement practices. The state is already working
to turn over its light duty fleet to ZEVs and more efficient fleet vehicles—
including reducing the footprint of vehicles, where possible, to categories
that are available in more efficient models. As more ZEV and hybrid options
become available in the medium and heavy duty market, state procurement
targets should look to these vehicle classes as well. Further, the state will
explore whether there are options to improve air quality performance on its
projects during construction.
VMT Reduction Strategies
In addition to transitioning the fleet toward zero emissions vehicles,
reducing the growth in vehicle miles traveled is a critical element of reducing
pollution from the transportation sector. For 2030, the HB 1261 Targets
Scenario models a 10% VMT reduction below the levels in the Reference
Scenario. Land use decisions and providing more options to travelers is
important to reducing the emissions impacts of driving. This includes both
increasing access to clean transit vehicles but also providing more choices to
manage demand, and associated pollution, on the roadways over time.
Notably, VMT during the “Stay at Home” period of the COVID-19 pandemic
was significantly lower compared to pre-COVID-19 levels. It is notable that
VMT reductions hovered close to 10% during the summer of 2020 and were
maintained for an additional period of months even though there was an
uptick in economic activity during that time period. The state has embedded
this 10% reduction in its projections based on the assumption that shifts in
behavior over a meaningful period of time may make this reduced level of
VMT sustainable, especially when coupled with supportive policies to help
manage driving demand such as affordable housing close to job locations and
ensuring that Colorado’s economy remains in the top tier of the nation. This
will likely require a suite of policy solutions, such as:
63

● Transportation Demand Management (TDM): Utilizing incentives,
marketing, and other tools to encourage non-Single Occupancy Vehicle
travel, is a core strategy in reducing VMT. Traditionally, this has meant
working with employers to provide transit passes, encourage
carpooling, and making
multimodal options more
appealing. In light of COVID-19, a
specialized focus on making
teleworking more permanent will
be essential in promoting a
longer-term shift toward
alternatives to driving. This must
be a concerted effort to support
and encourage employees,
employers, and local communities in reshaping the work commute.
One strategy is trip reduction planning for large employers, which
would ensure that employers over an employee size threshold develop
TDM programs for their employees. The state intends to submit this
proposal to the AQCC in 2021 for consideration in the transportation
GHG rulemaking. TDM requirements can save companies money, save
employees time, and are likely necessary to help achieve tight 70 and
75 ppb standards for ground level ozone. If the Denver/North Front
Range Nonattainment Area is re-designated as Severe for ozone, TDM
requirements will likely be required under the federal Clean Air Act.
● Land use planning and land use incentives: VMT is driven in part by the
land use planning decisions made at local and regional levels.
Designing and building communities that allow for and encourage the
use of biking, walking, transit, and other low-carbon modes of
transportation will decrease emissions. Local governments often make
decisions that have the effect of separating housing at long distances
from employment, as well as often placing major trip destinations,
64

such as grocery stores, schools, colleges and hospitals, far away from
where people live, often far from public transit access, and often using
exclusionary zoning to limit the ability to increase housing supply
within communities. In many cases, limited state transportation funds
are then used to try to address the high levels of traffic that come
from these land use decisions. These land use patterns negatively
impact the state budget and often lead to racial and social inequities
as lower-income workers are forced into very long commutes, and
worsen GHG and other air pollution. State agencies must work with
local governments and metropolitan planning organizations to develop
strategies to promote more sustainable land use planning. As part of
this effort, the state will explore options for how best to incentivize
smart land use decisions. It should also be noted that land use planning
strategies can have a beneficial multiplier effect on other
transportation policies. For example, pairing land use planning policies
or incentives with vehicle electrification will result in higher GHG
reductions than doing either policy in isolation. It is important to
recognize the challenges in addressing this issue, particularly given the
long history of local control of land use decisions in Colorado. State
agencies will lead a study and stakeholder engagement process in 2021
that can develop detailed proposals for agency action and potential
legislation in 2022.
● Integrate State GHG Pollution Standards and Analysis in Regional, and
Statewide Plans: The transportation planning process in Colorado does
not fully account for the impacts of GHG emissions when identifying
and selecting projects for funding and construction. The Statewide
Transportation Plan, Regional Transportation Plans, and Statewide
Transportation Improvement Program are key documents that establish
funding priorities for future years and decades, but do not
meaningfully factor estimated increases or decreases in GHG emissions
65

into cost-benefit analyses of specific projects or entire funding
programs. Establishing GHG budgets for projects, programs, and future
plans and requiring the inclusion of the social cost of carbon in benefitcost analyses will more accurately reflect the trade-offs between
projects and allow for planners, decision-makers, and the public to
evaluate them accordingly. For regional and state plans, a possible
model is the existing air quality conformity process, in which CDOT
would work with the AQCC to establish emissions budgets, as is done
today for ozone and other criteria pollutants. The state can also more
fully incorporate GHG emissions in project level environmental review.
The specifics of such policies must be developed through close
collaboration between CDPHE, CDOT and major metropolitan planning
areas— especially those that are currently situated in nonattainment
areas, which is where policies should be most focused, in order to
maximize the co-benefits of reduced ozone pollution. This will be
submitted to the AQCC for consideration in a summer 2021
transportation GHG rulemaking. Note that while this is listed under
VMT reduction strategies, it will also support planning decisions and
mitigation activities that support ZEV adoption.
● Enhanced multimodal options: Increased transit and active
transportation options are critical to reducing VMT. This could include
more investment in physical infrastructure such as mobility hubs or
light or commuter rail (e.g., the proposed Front Range Passenger Rail
project along I-25). It could also include more regular and reliable
service along existing routes, such as more frequent and expansive bus
rapid transit along congested corridors. Increased investment in transit
and multimodal infrastructure can yield the behavior change required
to get people out of their cars, as evidenced in Seattle, where a large
ballot measure to fund light rail, enhanced bus services, and
congestion mitigation, all contributed to a drop in VMT.xxxiii This will
66

require incorporating such elements into future transportation funding
packages, and prioritizing multimodal options in programming existing
revenue streams. For example, the Governor’s FY 2021-22 budget
request includes $70M for CDOTs Safer Main Streets and Revitalizing
Main Streets programs which provides communities with funds for
projects that encourage safe, multimodal and active transportation
options for Colorado’s downtowns and rural main streets.
Indirect Source Rulemaking
Indirect sources are recognized by the federal Clean Air Act as
emissions sources that generate or attract motor vehicle activity, such as
shopping malls, developments, office buildings, warehouses, or industrial
sites. In California, regulation has been used to mitigate the impacts of these
sources’ vehicular activity on air quality more directly than motor vehicle
emissions standards. This can be done through the NEPA process for some
federally-funded or approved projects. For all or some categories of projects,
indirect source rules could supplement local land use authority to ensure the
impacts from large attractors of mobile sources are evaluated and mitigated.
Implementation of this type of regulation could help encourage more
sustainable, multimodal and transit-oriented development, and could
generate mitigation measures that support electrification. In developing
proposed standards, state agencies will work with disproportionately
impacted communities to prioritize emissions reductions that will have direct
public health benefits to these communities in addition to reducing GHG
pollution. The intent is to develop a proposal for submission to the AQCC for
consideration in a 2022 transportation rulemaking.
Clean Fuels Standard
A Clean Fuel Standard (“CFS”) is designed to decrease the carbon
intensity of the state’s transportation fuels and provide an increasing range of
low-carbon and renewable fuel alternatives. A CFS functions by establishing
carbon intensity ratings for different fuel types based on their lifecycle
67

emissions impact and then establishing carbon intensity benchmarks that
increase in stringency over time. Fuels that are below the carbon intensity
benchmark generate credits while those above the benchmark generate
deficits, and thereby a market is created that encourages greater investment
in low carbon fuels and discourages continued production and use of highcarbon alternatives. A CFS could serve as a mechanism for continued progress
toward reducing the emissions generated by the transportation system. The
CEO conducted a feasibility study in 2020 that examined a range of clean fuel
standard scenarios that would achieve reductions in carbon intensity of 10%,
15%, and 20% over 10 years.xxxiv While the study concluded that a CFS is
feasible, a number of questions remain unanswered, including potential
double counting between emissions reductions from other light and heavy
duty electrification efforts and from a CFS. A more significant issue is that
the modeling indicated that, at least for the first decade, the bulk of
emissions reductions would come through replacement of gasoline and diesel
fuel with conventional biofuels. The state has not had a comprehensive
analysis or public process examining the tradeoffs involved with large scale
use of conventional biofuels, so it is premature to move forward with a CFS.
In addition, the compliance cost for a CFS would likely be passed along to
consumers of high carbon fuels such as gasoline and diesel, potentially
making the policy regressive for consumers who are unable to purchase lower
emitting vehicles. It may be more appropriate in the near term to look at
revenue mechanisms that directly support adoption of zero emissions
vehicles. Thus, we are not recommending that a CFS be part of the near term
action agenda for the state but instead should be further evaluated.
The state did receive substantial comment from many segments of the
biofuels industry on this topic, as well as from companies involved in carbon
capture and sequestration, urging the state to consider adopting a clean fuels
standard. The state also received comments from stakeholders concerned
about the indirect land use impacts of biofuels production. We are not
68

recommending that a CFS be part of the near term action agenda for the
state but instead that it should be evaluated further, with full discussion of
the appropriate role for biofuels and how CFS program design would best
support the state’s policy objectives.
Aviation
While not as large a contributor to greenhouse gases as surface
transportation, aviation will become increasingly important between now and
2050. Emissions from the sector are estimated at 4 million tons in 2015 and 5
million tons annually from 2020 to 2030. Emissions from aviation are more
difficult to manage due to extensive federal control of the sector and
expectations for long-term growth in demand. Industry, technology and
supply chain changes will be important for long-term sustainability of aviation
greenhouse gas emissions.
Fortunately, airlines are committing to investments and approaches to
reduce long-term emissions from aviation. For example, United Airlines,
which has a large hub in Denver, pledged in December 2020 to reduce its net
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 100% by 2050. In 2018, United became the
first U.S. airline to commit to reducing its GHG emissions by 50% by
2050. United recently committed to a multimillion-dollar investment in
atmospheric carbon capture technology known as direct air capture, and is
continuing to invest in the development and use of sustainable aviation fuel
(SAF), with 80 percent lower lifecycle emissions. Other airlines are expected
to undertake similar commitments and make changes to reduce emissions
over time, and we expect additional international efforts to reduce aviation
emissions.
Technology will also play a critical role. In addition to approaches like
direct air capture and biofuels like SAF, manufacturers, researchers and
airlines are exploring use of electricity and hydrogen in some aviation
contexts to reduce emissions. Ground operations can also be electrified.
69

Residential, Commercial and Industrial Fuel Use
The Roadmap analysis shows that the use of fossil methane in buildings
and industry is one of the four major sources of GHG pollution in Colorado.
Emissions from burning of fossil methane for space heating, water heating,
and cooking not only contribute to GHG pollution but worsen indoor air
quality.
Meeting the state’s GHG targets will require reducing pollution from
buildings and industry. The state’s Near Term Action Plan includes new
requirements for gas utilities to reduce carbon emissions. To ensure that
utilities are making progress toward these goals, the Roadmap calls for
increasing utility investments in energy efficiency, the use of lower carbon
fuels such as biogas or hydrogen, benchmarking energy use and setting energy
and emissions performance standards for large commercial buildings,
requiring investor owned electric utilities to develop beneficial electrification
programs to support customer adoption of technologies like electric heat
pumps, transitioning certain appliances from fossil methane to electricity,
moving to advanced building codes, enhancing financing opportunities for
customers who want to invest in lower-carbon technologies, and requiring
industrial and energy emissions audits and use of best available control
technologies by industrial operations.
Colorado’s Gas Utilities
The 1261 Targets Scenario for 2030 includes emissions reductions of
37% below 2005 levels from fossil methane end uses (exclusive of electricity
generation). However, Colorado does not have requirements for the state’s
gas distribution utilities to reduce GHG pollution. In the development of the
near term actions, the state agency team concluded that a 20% reduction
from 2005 levels (4.75 million tons from residential, commercial and
industrial fuel use) was achievable by 2030.

70

The Public Utilities Commission has taken an important step in looking
at the role of gas utilities in meeting the state GHG goals. In fall 2020, the
PUC opened a proceeding to investigate whether changes in fossil methane
utilities could help meet the state’s GHG pollution reduction goals and the
impacts that those changes might have on utilities and their customers.xxxv At
the time this report was published, the investigation was still on-going.
However, PUC commissioners have stated that they intend to investigate
steps the PUC can take now to reduce pollution from gas utilities while longterm regulatory changes are being implemented, including gathering
information about:
● Historic gas utility customer GHG emissions and associated system
and upstream emissions
● Expectations for reduction of GHG emissions from the retail fossil
methane sector or customers
● Options to decarbonize retail fossil methane utilities and the costs
and benefits of those actions
● Impacts on customers who participate in income-qualified programs
● Potential for electrification of current fossil methane loads
In addition to the planning actions taken at the PUC, we are
recommending legislation in 2021 to set statutory goals for the reduction of
emissions by gas distribution utilities. The emissions reduction trajectory will
be more gradual than in the electric sector, in part because there are fewer
lower-cost technologies available and because many of the actions needed
require action by utility customers, not just the utility company. Legislation
could allow a utility flexibility in the measures used to achieve the emissions
reduction goals and could include direction to the PUC to consider both the
emissions reduction achieved and the cost of the plan. By setting a
technology neutral emissions standard, the legislation would enable utilities
to cost effectively achieve needed emissions reductions through a number of
strategies, including, providing incentives for building energy efficiency
71

improvements; lowering the carbon intensity of gas that is used through some
combination of use of biogas and hydrogen produced from renewable
resources rather than fossil methane; the electrification of some end uses in
buildings and industrial processes; increasing usage of electric and induction
stoves; and reducing methane leaks from utility gas distribution systems.
Biogas Portfolio Standard and Leak Standards for Gas Utilities
As the state considers options for reducing the carbon intensity of
fossil methane delivered to Colorado homes and businesses, it may look at a
program that would require certain gas utilities to meet a GHG intensity
standard across their portfolio. As part of a program like this, biogas and
hydrogen from renewable energy resources could be used to replace a portion
of the fossil methane currently sold to residential, commercial, or industrial
customers. Biogas refers to methane that is captured from sources such as
sewage treatment plants, landfills and dairy farms and otherwise is emitted
directly into the atmosphere. Biogas could also be used to generate electric
power or in the transportation sector to reduce emissions there.
In addition to requiring the use of lower-carbon fuels, the state could
also set enhanced leak detection and repair requirements that apply to the
gas distribution system. This could be structured as a standalone requirement
for utilities without GHG targets or could be one measure that gas utilities
could take as part of a suite of measures to achieve GHG reduction targets in
a gas clean energy plan. It will be important to have a process at the PUC to
evaluate costs for this transition and the impacts on customers, especially
lower-income customers. One important note is that the potential supply of
biogas from waste is relatively constrained, probably topping out at 5-10% of
current gas use in the state, based on the 2019 renewable natural gas study
conducted for the Colorado Energy Office.xxxvi However, because much of this
is currently emitted directly to the atmosphere, and since the global warming
potential of methane is so high compared to carbon dioxide, if biogas use by

72

utilities stimulates a market that captures this methane, the reduction in
emissions could be quite high.
Modernizing Gas Energy Efficiency Programs
Colorado adopted its initial gas demand-side management program in
2007. Under those programs, the state’s regulated gas utilities are required
to provide rebates and incentives to customers that help those customers
purchase more efficient appliances that reduce gas use and save money.
While recent statutory changes extended those programs, the investment and
savings have been very modest compared to the level of efficiency
improvements that are achieved by leading utility programs. Modernizing the
state's statutory requirements for gas efficiency programs will create one
pathway to reducing emissions from the gas utilities. Modernizing gas
efficiency could include requiring the PUC to set savings-based targets to
achieve all cost effective and achievable energy savings, incorporating the
social cost of greenhouse gas emissions in cost benefit analysis (as is done for
electric sector DSM), and better aligning gas DSM with the state’s goal of
improving building shells and increasing electrification in buildings.
In order to ensure that these strategies promote equity and avoid
potential unintended consequences, programs need to prioritize accessibility
to efficiency improvements and electrification for lower-income households
and provide special consideration and compliance flexibility for affordable
housing. Efforts should be made to create education and outreach initiatives
that provide clear and credible information to people about the benefits of
energy efficiency and of transitioning to electric appliances. It is also
important to ensure that utility investments help to develop workforce skills
and provide good jobs. To achieve these goals, legislative action should
ensure appropriate apprenticeship opportunities and labor standards for large
projects included in utility funded programs.

73

Commercial Building Benchmarking and Performance Standards
While state and local governments and utilities are seeking to
decarbonize their building stock, it is challenging to set energy or emissions
reduction targets without an understanding of how buildings are performing
currently.
The Colorado Energy Office is in the process of launching a commercial
building benchmarking program. The program, when fully developed, will
enable building owners to report energy use data to a statewide database.
The program will work to modernize utility data protocols to improve
customer access to building level energy data. Making whole building energy
use data more transparent will help identify cost-effective opportunities for
energy efficiency and beneficial electrification upgrades. After establishing
baselines for buildings, the program will require less efficient buildings to
make improvements that will reduce energy consumption, save money for
owners, and lower GHG emissions. Once the program requirements are in
place, fee for service or fines for non-compliance could fund this program and
provide additional dollars for education and technical assistance to further
building decarbonization work.
The Colorado Housing and Finance Authority (“CHFA”) will require
affordable housing projects that receive tax credits to annually assess and
report their building energy performance using the free ENERGY STAR
Portfolio Manager tool. Benchmarking building energy use will help CHFA and
other partners understand energy savings and costs in publicly-funded
affordable housing, leading to better design of energy efficiency standards
and incentives.
Building Electrification Requirements for Utilities
A Colorado Energy Office study of beneficial electrification potential
estimated the technical, economic, and achievable potentials for beneficial
electrification in buildings in Colorado over the next ten years. As shown
below, the report concluded that electrification in Colorado provides
74

substantial opportunities to reduce GHG emissions in the built environment.
The research identified key technologies and sectors that can benefit from
this transition. The report found a high potential adoption of residential
space and water heating, concluding that with the right policy support nearly
200,000 homes could have electric heat pumps by 2030. The report also found
that switching from propane to electrified end-uses is cost effective currently
and recommended the state consider prioritizing efforts that can help
transition customers from propane to electrification.
Figure 19: GHG Reduction Potential from CEO’s Electrification Report

The report analyzed market barriers that will impede electrification
efforts and provides policy and program recommendations to accelerate the
adoption of BE technologies noting that the BE market in Colorado is
nascent—the next five years will be a critical market preparation period to
develop policies, programs, outreach, awareness, contractor training and the
supply chain to drive higher adoption rates over the long-term.
Consistent with the administration’s efforts to build a Colorado for all,
growth in BE adoption must occur equitably and include Colorado’s most
vulnerable residents. Successful BE adoption must address current barriers
and ensure that affordable technologies are available and financially
accessible to all customers and that vulnerable customers do not shoulder a
disproportionate share of the cost for this transition.

75

Based on the analysis in the Roadmap, the state is advancing policies
that will cultivate market transformation including adoption of a requirement
for investor-owned utilities to file plans to support beneficial building
electrification by providing rebates and incentives for customers to switch to
electric heat-pump water heaters and heat-pump space heating. As with
Senate Bill 19-077 and the resulting consideration of transportation
electrification plans at the PUC, it will be important to require that utility
beneficial electrification plans have a particular focus on enabling
electrification by lower-income customers and in disproportionately impacted
communities. The state is also intending to pursue expansion of finance
programs that support building improvements, including electrification.
Currently, the RENU loan program supports the installation of eligible heat
pump technology in the residential sector and the Colorado C-PACE program
recently enacted a program change to further accommodate the deployment
of BE technologies in the commercial sector. The state will also look for
opportunities to expand beneficial electrification for lower-income residents
through the Weatherization Assistance Program. It is also important to ensure
that utility investments help to develop workforce skills and provide good
jobs. In order to achieve this, legislative action should ensure appropriate
apprenticeship opportunities and labor standards for large projects included
in utility funded programs.
Advanced Building Codes
Strong building energy codes require new construction or major
renovation projects to improve energy performance and lower emissions. But
building energy codes do more than reduce energy use in buildings, they
ensure the safety, health, durability, sustainability, and affordability of
buildings. The state, through the work of the Colorado Energy Office, is
committed to continuing to support building energy code training and
technical assistance to enable local governments to more easily adopt current
and advanced building energy codes on a regular cycle, and to get them on a
path to zero energy or zero carbon standards. CEO engages with stakeholders
76

and jurisdictions through the Colorado Energy Code Compliance Collaborative
and other networks to ensure that local governments have the latest
information they need to make informed building code decisions through
training, resources, and technical assistance. The state may explore
regulatory or legislative avenues to strengthen building codes statewide and
make the built environment more resilient to the effects of climate change.
Financing
Achieving Colorado’s GHG pollution reduction goals will require
innovative financing mechanisms and products to help deliver the capital
needed to transform the built environment. As noted earlier in the report,
the state has deployed several programs including Energy Performance
Contracting, C-PACE, and RENU, which have realized significant results to
date and demonstrate how public-private partnerships can be used to
leverage public money to generate considerable private sector capital
investment. The state also worked with the U.S. Department of Energy and
the Coalition for Green Capital to create the Colorado Clean Energy Fund,
intended as a green bank for the state that could fund clean energy and
energy efficiency investments. There is tremendous opportunity to continue
to scale these programs to ensure that residential, commercial, and public
sectors have access to low-cost financing for clean energy projects. The state
supports developing and expanding other innovative financing models
including utility on-bill financing or on-bill repayment options to reduce a
barrier to upgrading inefficient buildings, reach new markets, and ensure
equitable and universal access to clean energy technologies. These low-risk
models have the potential to increase adoption of energy efficient
appliances, beneficial electrification technologies such as heat pumps, heat
pump water heaters and induction cooktops, as well as on-site renewable
energy systems or EV chargers for all sectors, but especially for incomequalified households.

77

One particular near term opportunity is to expand RENU and C-PACE,
and to capitalize the CCEF. As outlined in further detail below, Governor Polis
has requested $40 million in supplemental stimulus funding in FY 2020-21 for
clean energy finance as part of his budget request to the legislature.
Industrial Energy and Emissions Audit Requirements
As part of addressing GHG pollution from Colorado’s energy-intensive
trade exposed industries, HB 19-1261 directs the AQCC to require such
industries to undertake energy and emissions audits. These audit
requirements may also be extended to other industrial sectors as a
mechanism to assess potential for GHG reduction strategies. APCD is
beginning a stakeholder process in late fall 2020 to develop the requirements
for conducting and reporting these audits. It is expected that the energy and
emissions audit program will be part of a broader GHG rulemaking package
scheduled on the AQCC long-term calendar for Summer 2021. It is
anticipated, as called for in HB 19-1261, that sources undertaking energy and
emission audits will be required to implement best available control
technologies and efficiency practices to reduce GHG emissions or achieve
comparable reductions through other measures. The audits will also give
state agencies a greater understanding of the potential for emissions
reductions in diverse industrial operations and may be used to inform future
programs or rulemakings.

78

Oil and Gas
Implementation of SB 19-181 & Minimizing Sector Emissions
AQCC rulemakings to implement SB 19-181 have already commenced
and will be an iterative process over the next few years. The AQCC completed
a rulemaking that included combustion emissions from stationary engines
used in this sector, mandatory monitoring for new wells, pre-production
emissions controls and other measures in September 2020. Additional
rulemakings are included in the AQCC long term planning calendar for 2021
and 2022 and are expected to focus on reducing methane pollution
throughout the sector.

79

To achieve the state’s 2025 and 2030 emissions goals, methane
emissions from the oil and gas sector as a whole will need to be reduced by at
least 33% by 2025 and over 50% by 2030. The state is targeting 12 million tons
of emission reductions from the oil and gas sector by 2030, compared to the
2005 baseline. This level of emissions reductions is deeper than modeled in
the HB 1261 Targets Scenario. The decision to pursue deeper reductions in
the oil and gas sector reflects the fact that low cost technological solutions
are available to get these reductions and that getting deeper reductions from
oil and gas will reduce the need to seek reductions from other sectors that
may be harder to decarbonize. The specific requirements of the rule are
expected to be informed through a stakeholder process, including a review of
technological and operational changes that can be implemented to reduce
methane releases. The APCD initiated the stakeholder process for this rule on
November 5, 2020, and the AQCC long-term calendar plans a hearing in the
fourth quarter of 2021.
Reducing the release of methane also reduces the VOCs and other
emissions that are co-pollutants with the methane gas stream being
controlled. These reductions will further the state’s progress in attaining
ozone standards and minimizing emissions of the co-pollutants which
disproportionately impact the health of Colorado communities.
In addition to the ongoing activities to implement the SB 19-181
requirements, SB 20-204 allocated additional funding to the APCD and
created a new Air Quality Enterprise for Colorado. The additional resources
allocated to APCD are expected to be applied toward the increased need for
permitting, inspection, and enforcement activities associated with the high
number of oil and gas facilities operating under permit requirements that are
classified as serious nonattainment for ozone. For the first time, the Air
Quality Enterprise creates a mechanism for planning and funding
collaborative research through educational institutions with public and
private sector involvement. Some of this research is expected to focus on
80

gaining a better understanding and reconciling the differences between topdown monitoring and bottom-up inventory methodologies for the oil and gas
sector. Understanding these measurement dynamics is critical to ensuring
that the projected emissions reductions are realized through the
implementation of the SB 19-181 requirements.
COGCC Flaring Restrictions and Comprehensive Planning
On November 23, 2020, the COGCC completed a series of
comprehensive rule changes to implement the updated priorities of the
COGCC under SB 19-181. This rulemaking included revisions to regulations to
strengthen flaring restrictions, comprehensive planning, reducing emissions,
and other increased protections for public health and environment. The
rulemaking also requires evaluating and addressing the cumulative impacts of
oil and gas development, and includes specific cumulative impact regulatory
requirements directed at reducing air emissions. In addition, the COGCC
rules:
● Prohibit routine flaring of natural gas from pre-production and
operations at oil and gas sites. There is a limited one-year
exception for existing facilities to come into compliance. By itself,
this measure is expected to improve local air quality and reduce
significant CO2e emissions by 2025.
● Require all new oil and gas development plans to provide detailed
information regarding greenhouse gas emissions associated with
proposed oil and gas development as well as cumulative impact
plans detailing how these emissions will be avoided and minimized.
The COGCC will be responsible for determining if permit
applications avoid and minimize impacts to public health and the
environment.
● Create extensive public comment and consultation provisions to
consider the effects of proposed oil and gas development.

81

● Require ongoing consideration of the cumulative effects of
greenhouse gas emissions through an annual report that includes an
assessment of whether actual emissions reductions are on track
with the trajectory identified in this Roadmap for achieving
statewide reduction targets, the identification of technologies to
achieve further emissions reductions, and recommendations of
additional steps that may be needed to improve the
implementation of regulatory requirements.
Natural and Working Lands Greenhouse Gas Inventory
A comprehensive natural and working lands emissions inventory is
essential for monitoring and verifying changes in GHG pollution and carbon
sequestration from land-based activities and is a critical priority for the
Natural and Working Lands Task Force over the next one to three years. While
Colorado’s existing GHG inventory includes metrics such as emissions from
agricultural fertilizer applications, methane associated with livestock
production, forest carbon, and certain emissions from wildfires, it is not
comprehensive. For example, it does not fully quantify the effects of land use
conversion on the total carbon balance of Colorado’s natural and working
lands. Accounting for the impact of land use change, including when natural
and working lands are developed, will allow the state to track and measure
the critical roles land conservation, agricultural stewardship, and ecosystem
restoration play in reducing GHG pollution. This will also help support policies
and programs to improve land use planning. An agricultural GHG inventory
will also measure voluntary reductions in emissions from implementation of
CDA’s Soil Health Program and Farm Bill conservation practices through the
Natural Resources Conservation Service (“NRCS”).
In addition, the state must determine whether the federal forest
carbon flux estimates used in Colorado’s GHG inventory accurately estimate
Colorado’s forest carbon flux given the large wildfires Colorado has
experienced since 2000. In 2020, Colorado experienced the three largest
82

wildfires ever recorded. Research indicates that forests may not naturally
reestablish post-fire in some areas as quickly as they have in the past,
meaning that without reforestation, wildfires may not be carbon neutral
within the 21st century. Colorado should establish a baseline estimate for
GHG emissions associated with natural fire regimes prior to 20th century fire
suppression to compare with recent wildfire emissions. The state also does
not have an accurate estimate of the amount of forest carbon sequestered in
sustainable wood products each year (e.g., in construction materials). The
state aims to resolve some of these questions by working with the research
community. In spite of these research needs, Colorado is moving forward with
no-regrets strategies to mitigate climate change through improved
conservation, restoration, and management of our natural and working lands.

Natural and Working Lands Strategic Plan
The NWL Task Force, in partnership with The Nature Conservancy, is
currently conducting a technical analysis funded by the U.S. Climate Alliance
to quantify the potential of Colorado’s natural and working lands (forests,
rangelands, grasslands, croplands, riparian areas and wetlands, and urban
landscapes) to contribute to the state’s ambitious greenhouse gas reduction
goals by 2050. This effort will result in a Natural and Working Lands Strategic
Plan in 2021 that will identify priority pathways for carbon-smart land
management, set quantifiable emissions and sequestration goals for this
sector, and inform strategic NWL research, program, and policy development.
The NWL Strategic Plan will also evaluate ways to align state grant programs
to promote natural climate solutions and will support and leverage other
state and local planning processes, including, but not limited to the Colorado
Water Plan,xxxvii Colorado Resiliency Framework,xxxviii State Wildlife Action
Plan,xxxix Drought Mitigation Plan,xl Forest Action Plan,xli and sustainable landuse planning efforts led by the Department of Transportation.
While this technical work is underway, state agencies are
implementing carbon-smart policies and programs. The Colorado State Forest
83

Service, in partnership with the U.S. Forest Service, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, and other federal, state and local partners, carry out
forest restoration work that reduces the risk of high-severity wildfire and
improves forest health. While reducing woody fuels through thinning and
prescribed fire may initially reduce the carbon stored in Colorado’s forests,
these treatments can increase the resilience of forests to wildfires, insects,
and disease, thereby ensuring forest carbon stocks are more stable over time.
Dozens of existing forest collaboratives, as well as the new Rocky Mountain
Restoration Initiative and state-level Shared Stewardship initiative, are
working to increase the pace and scale of this work. These partnerships are
also seeking solutions to expand Colorado’s limited forestry workforce and
markets for woody biomass utilization, which pose one of the biggest barriers
to cost-effective forest management in Colorado.
Colorado Parks and Wildlife, the Colorado State Forest Service, the
State Land Board and other agencies, conserve several million acres of
natural lands in Colorado that are important carbon sinks. These conservation
efforts include the acquisition of Fisher’s Peak in 2020, Colorado’s second
largest state park. As these efforts continue, state staff are exploring a
variety of opportunities and policy actions to further support this work.
Soil Health Program
Starting in 2020, the Colorado Department of Agriculture has been
participating in a soil health initiative in coordination with individual
stakeholders, the Colorado Collaborative for Healthy Soils, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service,
conservation districts, the Colorado Department of Natural Resources, and
the Natural and Working Lands Task Force. The goal of this initiative, which is
voluntary and incentive-based, is to provide technical assistance and grants
to producers to implement soil health practices that benefit the environment
and the state’s climate goals while supporting the financial stability of
Colorado’s farmers and ranchers. This effort aligns with a growing number of
84

public and private efforts throughout the United States and other parts of the
world to mitigate climate change through the voluntary implementation of
improved agricultural stewardship practices that simultaneously help mitigate
risk and expand revenue opportunities for producers.
Through increased access to private market opportunities that support
producers who wish to transition to practices that regenerate the soil and
help meet climate goals, Colorado agricultural producers will be able to take
advantage of national programs such as Field to Market, Soil Health
Partnership, and the Ecosystem Services Market Consortium in a way that
works for their business. CDA is aligning these tools through traditional
pathways, such as conservation districts, and new routes, such as improved
market incentives. In addition, CDA’s soil health initiative is building toward
the development of an inventory framework to aggregate and measure
climate mitigation activities within the agricultural sector.
In 2021, CDA will launch a new Soil Health Program built from its
current Soil Health Initiative to support and encourage farmers and ranchers
to adopt voluntary practices that sequester carbon, reduce GHG emissions,
increase drought resilience, conserve energy resources, and promote
sustainable agriculture in Colorado. While many farmers and ranchers have
been practicing various soil conservation practices over the last 20 years,
creating a Soil Health Program will provide research, technical assistance,
and incentives to support producers looking to map and quantify biological
benefits for agricultural operations transitioning from conventional tillage
programs to more biologically beneficial methods. Encouraging and
potentially creating incentives for voluntary participation in these practices
will enhance resilience to extreme weather and natural catastrophes, such as
drought, flood and wildfire events. The program may also create a pathway
for Colorado farmers and ranchers to participate in emerging environmental
services and carbon markets.

85

Agricultural Climate Resilience Office
CDA is pursuing creation of an Agricultural Climate Resilience Office
that would expand and advance CDA’s capacity to provide direct support and
resources to producers, conservation districts, and other agricultural entities
to reduce GHG emissions, enhance carbon sequestration and cycling, and
engage in emerging marketplaces that support producers’ bottom lines while
incentivizing regenerative or climate-friendly practices. ACRO will be located
within the Conservation Services Division to administer programs that help
absorb risk by providing technical and grant support for Colorado agriculture
facing significant climate-related threats, and by creating the administrative
framework to help address and measure the agricultural greenhouse gas
reduction targets in the Colorado Greenhouse Gas Pollution Reduction
Roadmap through voluntary, farmer and rancher led stewardship practices.
As CDA advances its work on climate change from the agricultural
perspective a number of administrative barriers have been identified that
limit its ability to continue existing programs, to implement new programs,
and to administer programs effectively. The ACRE3 Program and Soil Health
Initiative operate under authority from two separate boards housed within
two separate divisions at CDA. ACRO would align those programs under one
umbrella while allowing the department to develop and deploy more
resources that support Colorado agriculture in advancing climate solutions.
Natural/Working Lands Strategies in Rural/Urban Communities
The economic strength of many rural communities depends on natural
and working lands, whether through agricultural production, outdoor
recreation and tourism, or other natural resource industries. These
communities are particularly vulnerable to increasing climate-related natural
hazards, such as drought, pests, floods, wildfires, storms and tornadoes.
Natural climate solutions present a critical opportunity for equitable climate
change adaptation and mitigation in Colorado. Industries that are dependent
on healthy natural and working lands are vital to providing jobs and sustaining
86

local businesses, as well as funding infrastructure and services like schools,
government programs, and hospitals.
Farm workers and equipment operators play essential roles in farm,
ranch, and forestry operations and require adequate housing, access to
healthcare and other services, and safe and healthy working conditions. In
many instances, workers, such as migrant laborers, may not be eligible for
Medicaid, and social isolation can increase mental health challenges across all
rural economic levels. In rural areas, people of color, lower-income residents,
and linguistically isolated individuals are often the hardest hit when climate
change-related natural hazards occur. These individuals may experience
direct financial losses and have fewer financial resources and social
connections for them to adequately prepare for and recover from natural
disasters.
Considering equity in natural and working lands policy is also important
in urban areas. Long-term disinvestment in urban canopy cover in lowerincome communities and communities of color contributes to disparities in
urban heat impacts. Insufficient access to greenspace further amplifies
inequalities in mental and physical health. Therefore, in addition to helping
to address climate change, expanding urban canopy cover and greenspace has
multiple social co-benefits, particularly when paired with affordable housing,
energy, and transportation policies. Prioritizing land for urban agriculture
programs can also address disparities in education and food security.
Natural climate solutions must be informed by principles of
environmental justice, as well as enhanced outreach and engagement with
these important stakeholder groups. The state can enhance equity
considerations in natural climate solutions through various strategies,
including modifying grant making requirements for rural communities and
those with fewer economic resources, providing targeted technical support,
developing resources to communicate with linguistically-diverse audiences,
87

and consulting with and learning from impacted groups. This work will be
developed and strengthened as state agencies continue to build an equity,
diversity, and inclusion framework into programs and services.
ACRE3
Going forward, the Advancing Colorado’s Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency Program has identified three strategic priorities: (i) agricultural
energy efficiency and photovoltaics, which focuses on reducing energy costs
in energy-intensive operations, such as dairies, pumped irrigation, and
greenhouses; (ii) agricultural
hydropower, which focuses on
energy-recovery hydropower and
water resources conservation in
irrigated fields and irrigation canals
and ditches; and (iii) renewable
thermal technologies, which focuses
on solar water heating, solar space
heating, and ground-source heat pumps in agricultural applications. The
ACRE3 program is evaluating criteria for agrivoltaic projects as an emerging
fourth priority.

Other Sectors
Coal Mine Methane Regulations
Coal mine emissions in Colorado are already declining significantly with
the transition away from coal-fired electricity generation, as demonstrated in
the 2019 Colorado GHG Inventory. The overall trend of declining emissions is
expected to continue as additional mines reduce production or close between
2020 and 2030. The analysis underpinning the state strategy for achieving the
2030 economy wide targets includes an expected reduction of 7 million tons
CO2e in annual emissions from coal mines due to mine closures by 2030.
Monitoring of production levels and the number of active mines in operation
will be performed as part of the tracking of critical metrics that are reported
88

annually to the AQCC and will be used in emissions projections for future GHG
inventory reports. Should these metrics indicate significant increases in
production or if new mines are opened, permit requirements may be
implemented or regulations addressing methane venting may be proposed for
future consideration at the AQCC. CDPHE and the Department of Natural
Resources will also work with land managers and other parties to explore
opportunities for using or flaring emissions from abandoned mines.
Methane from Landfills and Wastewater & Waste Diversion
In recent years, a number of new legislative efforts have provided an
influx of additional funds and resources towards improving Colorado's waste
diversion rate. In 2019, the legislature created the Front Range Waste
Diversion Enterprise Fund that will spur economic development and advance
the state's circular economy efforts with the goal of increasing the Front
Range waste diversion rate to 51% by 2036. The Enterprise Fund is financed
by an increase in user fees at Front Range landfills. Collection of these fees
began in January 2020 and will increase by 50 cents per ton per year for four
years, then annually by inflation, ultimately providing an estimated $15
million per year for waste diversion projects. The program announced the
first set of nine grant awards in November 2020 that will divert an additional
18,000 tons of waste from landfills.
CDPHE and CDA are collaborating on a 2021-22 fiscal year study and plan
to manage agricultural organic waste and promote compost use. The study will
conduct a gap analysis of the state’s current capacity to manage organic waste,
identify and prioritize key locations within the state that need additional
processing infrastructure, and examine a cost-benefit analysis and net GHG
implications of both infrastructure expansion and increased compost use
including agricultural healthy soil initiatives.

Waste management currently makes up a small but growing fraction of
Colorado’s GHG inventory. Colorado will continue accelerating waste
diversion efforts through funding under the Front Range Waste Diversion
89

Enterprise, Recycling Resources Economic Opportunity Program and other
recycling end use market development. Based on the statutory goal for the
Front Range Waste Diversion Enterprise of a 51% diversion rate by 2035, the
state is aiming for 32% and 39% rates by 2025 and 2030, respectively. The
state will continue to look for other opportunities to accelerate diversion
rates, especially for organic materials that can form methane.
Methane capture from landfills and wastewater treatment facilities
offers an opportunity to slow and ultimately reverse the emissions growth in
this sector. Capital investments and new infrastructure are required to
capture methane from these sources and these investments would benefit
from legislative action on a biogas standard to create a market for the
captured methane. In addition, future regulations may be considered for
adoption by the AQCC to address methane emissions from these sources. A
biogas standard will also spur investment in methane capture from
agricultural operations unlikely to be addressed by regulations, such as dairy
farms. As noted above, the emissions reductions associated with these
policies are shown in the residential, commercial and industrial fuel use
category, to avoid double counting.
HFC Regulation
In May 2020, Colorado became the first state to adopt the Climate
Alliance States' Model Framework for the phasing out of hydrofluorocarbons.
The Model Framework, adopted by AQCC as part of Air Regulation Number 22,
establishes phase out dates for the use of these potent greenhouse gases in
foams, aerosols, air conditioning, and refrigeration. The phase out of HFCs in
these products in Colorado is projected to reduce cumulative GHG pollution
by 6.34 MMT CO2e by 2030. Additional measures to reduce HFC emissions are
also being explored at the state and federal level. Potential measures include
bolstering maintenance and repair requirements for products in service that
use HFCs, such as air conditioners, and expanding the scope of the phase out
to additional end uses.
90

Carbon Capture, Use and Sequestration
The state received comment from multiple stakeholders that the draft
Roadmap did not sufficiently address the potential for carbon capture
utilization and storage to play a role in reducing GHG emissions in the next
decade and did not speak to any actions the state would take to enable or
support CCUS. We agree with this critique given the need for rapid reductions
in net emissions, the fact that there is serious consideration by the private
sector of carbon capture at some Colorado facilities, such as the
Holcim/LaFarge cement plant in Florence, and the existence of significant
federal incentives in the form of the 45(Q) tax credits. A further example is
United Airlines’ December 2020 commitment to completely eliminate
greenhouse gas emissions through strategies such as direct air capture and
sequestration of carbon dioxide.
At the same time, because this is not an area where the state
government has existing experience or expertise, many questions remain
unanswered: How can the state encourage carbon capture and sequestration
while also advancing reductions in localized air pollution? How should the
state treat carbon capture that is used for enhanced oil recovery as compared
to long term sequestration without enhanced oil recovery? Are there existing
state regulations or permitting processes that need to be modified to enable
CCUS? Should the state seek primacy over the EPA for permitting CCUS
operations? Are there requirements or incentives that should be enacted for
CCUS? Are there opportunities to provide jobs and economic development in
areas that are impacted by the move away from fossil fuels? How can policies
be designed to ensure benefits to diverse and disproportionately impacted
communities?
In order to address these questions and develop an action plan, the
state will convene a task force on CCUS starting in mid-2021, which will
report back to the Governor within a year with a recommended framework,

91

including policies and actions steps for pursuing CCUS that are aligned with
Colorado's emissions reduction targets.
Governor’s FY 2021-22 Budget
The Governor’s FY 2021-22 Budget advances a number of innovative
funding proposals that will help protect Coloradans from the existential
threat of climate change, improve air quality, and position Colorado to seize
on the economic benefits of a renewable energy economy. Although
forecasted revenues have improved, the economic forecast continues to
project an operating deficit. That is why this budget proposes stimulus and
strategic investments to help Colorado climb out faster and better. These
proposals include:
● $78M for wildfire relief, mitigation and prevention in light of the
extraordinarily destructive recent wildfire season, driven by a changing
climate and declining forest health.
● $40M for clean energy finance programs in FY 2020-21 to ensure that
we build our economy back better and position Colorado to seize on
the economic benefits of the clean energy economy.
○ Funding will be distributed among multiple existing programs
supported by the Colorado Energy Office, including the Colorado
Clean Energy Fund, the Colorado New Energy Improvement
District, CEO’s RENU loan program, and the Charge Ahead
Colorado program. The funding to these private-public
partnership programs will deploy limited state dollars to
leverage greater private capital for investments in clean energy
retrofits and construction.
● $5M in FY 2020-21 to further supplement the DOLA Renewable and
Clean Energy Challenge that supports local government investment in
renewable energy, energy efficiency, and energy conservation.
○ Investment will provide grants to local governments for a variety
of renewable and clean energy projects. Examples of projects in
the pipeline include micro-hydro systems, energy performance
contracting with solar photovoltaic components, community
solar gardens, charging stations for electric vehicles, and
solar/EV bus charging canopies with microgrid potential.
● The creation of an innovative new Agricultural Climate Resilience
Office at the Department of Agriculture.
92

○ The new office will provide technical support for Colorado

agricultural producers facing significant climate-related threats,
set up an inventory framework, and create the administrative
framework to help address agricultural GHG reduction and
carbon sequestration targets.
● $0.3M to build the capacity of Colorado’s Office of Just Transition to
ensure a just and equitable transition from a coal based economy.
● $70M in additional funding for CDOT’s Safer Main Streets and
Revitalizing Main Streets programs to be distributed directly to local
communities through grants. These programs directly help
communities reimagine public spaces in dramatic fashion,
implementing necessary COVID-19 mitigations, increasing multimodal
transportation access, and making it safer and easier for pedestrians
and cyclists to navigate Colorado main streets— actions that reduce
VMT.
The Governor’s FY 2021-22 Budget protects funding for high priority
programs and services, including:
● the Air Pollution Control Division ($28.9M) at CDPHE
○ provides air monitoring, researches pollution, and permits and
inspects air pollutant emitters.
● the Public Utilities Commission ($16.8M) at DORA
○ regulates utilities and facilities so that the people of Colorado
receive safe, reliable and reasonably priced services consistent
with the economic, environmental and social values of our state.
● the Oil & Gas Conservation Commission ($20.2M) at DNR
○ regulates the development of Colorado’s oil and gas natural
resources in a manner consistent with the protection of public
health, safety, the environment, and wildlife.
● Program Administration ($6.3M) at the Colorado Energy Office
○ supports the Executive Director’s Office, the CEO Policy Team, a
portion of the Transportation & Fuels Technology Team, and a
portion of the Building Innovation & Energy Finance Team.
Resource and Funding Considerations
Even beyond this upcoming year’s budget, additional funding, staff,
and resources will be necessary to develop rules, administer programs, and
make the investments needed to transform Colorado’s economy. House Bill
19-1261 provided $188,588 per year for 2 full-time equivalent positions at the
93

Air Pollution Control Division to develop and implement climate programs.
Senate Bill 19-096 provided $265,589 annually for 3.1 full time equivalent
positions to administer greenhouse gas inventories and other efforts under
that bill. Over the coming decades, the funding and staffing needed to
develop the rules, programs, incentives and other tools to transform
Colorado’s economy will be considered as part of the annual budget process.
For high level illustrative context, the table below compares the
resources available to the Division to California’s Air Resources Board
program for climate regulations, as well as funding believed necessary for
economy wide cap-and-trade programs for legislation in Washington and
Oregon. This comparison focuses on staffing and administrative capacity and
does not include the substantially larger amounts that will likely be needed
for incentives, infrastructure investment, and other tools to achieve
necessary progress to implement change. While these comparisons are not
indicative of specific resource needs for Colorado, the table illustrates
funding and resource capacity in other states leading on climate action.

94

California Air
Resources
Board
Climate
Program

Washington
Proposed Bill
SB 5981

Oregon
Proposed Bill
SB 1530B

Colorado Air
Pollution
Control
Division

Annual
Budgetxlii

$148M

$8.5M

$9.9M

$454,177

Staff

211.4xliii

38

26.5

5.1

NOTE: The CARB spending is only for certain administrative expenses and does not include
incentives and other program costs which range to billions of dollars.

Under Colorado’s constitution and laws, the General Assembly must
approve any departmental or agency spending, as well as provide new fee
authority. The voters must approve any new or increased taxes. The state is
working to maximize the use of existing funds and evaluate additional,
targeted resource needs and revenue sources moving forward to fully
implement the Roadmap as part of the annual budget process.
Carbon Pricing Mechanisms
The Roadmap focuses on a sector based approach to meeting the
state’s GHG pollution reduction goals with an emphasis on near term actions
that can help the state make progress toward the 2025 and 2030 goals and
ensure that the state remains on a path toward meeting the 2050 goals.
These sector based policies, based on standards and investment, are the
fastest pathways towards near and mid-term emissions reductions. As part of
the Roadmap process, the state has begun to evaluate the merits of shifting
tax burdens from income to GHG pollution. However, the work to develop the
sophisticated tax and economic modeling that would be necessary to further
explore this policy approach is outside the scope of this Roadmap. It would
require further evaluation for such an approach to be considered in the
future.

95

While the state received feedback about consideration of an economywide or individual sector cap and trade programs, the Roadmap is not
recommending pursuing an economy-wide cap. Colorado is taking an approach
that draws upon strong collaboration between the public and private sectors—
as opposed to focusing on a singular state rule that would be costly to
administer, does not guarantee the critical emissions reductions needed, and
risks shifting even more pollution to lower-wealth communities and
communities of color that are already bearing the brunt of poor
environmental quality. As outlined throughout the Roadmap, we have
identified a variety of opportunities to achieve near term, lasting emissions
reductions through a number of sector based policies spanning standards,
investment, innovation, and partnerships with key industries, local
governments, and other diverse stakeholders. It should be noted that in the
two sectors that are best suited to emissions regulation— electricity
generation and oil and gas development— the state’s policies will achieve
sector wide emissions reductions of 80% and over 50%, respectively, with a
high degree of enforceability.
Reporting, Tracking and Management of Progress Adaptation
Consistent with the resolution passed by the AQCC in October 2020,
the Air Pollution Control Division of the Department of Public Health and
Environment will report annually to the AQCC on current and projected GHG
inventories, will provide a complete assessment every two years, and will
provide assessments of the most dynamic sectors (e.g., oil and gas,
transportation, etc.) and areas of major change every other year. The reports
will compare current and projected emissions against subsector targets from
the Roadmap and identify proposed measures to return to a trajectory to
meet House Bill 19-1261 targets, if necessary. As part of its reporting, APCD
will also develop a dashboard of vital metrics that can be tracked monthly or
quarterly, such as oil and gas production, rig counts, VMT, and gas deliveries.
The intent is to allow regular periodic evaluation of whether the state is
making progress toward the targets set by HB 19-1261.
96

In an October Resolution, the AQCC provisionally adopted the following
sectoral targets to guide rulemakings. The AQCC intends to revisit these
targets and amend the Resolution as necessary following publication of the
final Roadmap.
Table 7: Emissions Reductions by Sector
Revised 2005
Baseline (MMT
CO2e)

2025 Target
(MMT CO2e)

2030 Target
(MMT CO2e)

Electricity

40.28

21

8

Oil and Gas

20.17

13

8

Transportation

30.71

23

18

Residential,
Commercial,
Industrial Energy
Use

24.65

26

20

Other

23.42

19.9

15.6

Total

139.22

102.9

69.6

--

26%

50%

Sector

Percent Reduction

In the October Resolution the AQCC also resolved to hold a public
meeting each September, starting in 2022, to assess whether the state is on
track to meet these targets. If not, the AQCC will take actions required to get
back on track to meet the emissions targets.

97

E3 SCENARIO ANALYSIS

Identifying pathways to make progress toward Colorado’s GHG
pollution reduction goals requires a comprehensive analysis of potential GHG
reduction measures across all sectors of the state’s economy. The state hired
Energy + Environmental Economics to conduct this evaluation of the emission
trajectory of the state and to model emissions reductions from policies and
actions taken since 2019. E3 also modeled potential emissions reductions
from additional measures Colorado could adopt to meet the pollution
reduction targets in the Colorado Climate Action Plan. This analysis provides
an initial foundation for Colorado to assess various decarbonization options,
identify areas for additional analysis, and consider concrete next steps in
making progress towards its 2025, 2030 and 2050 targets.

Colorado’s Emissions
E3 benchmarked its analysis to Colorado’s emission in 2015, the last
year that the state released a comprehensive GHG inventory. Colorado’s GHG
emissions in 2015 were dominated by electricity generation, transportation,
and the oil and gas sector. Electricity generation emissions are predominantly
attributed to coal combustion with a lesser portion from fossil methane
generators. Emissions from the oil and gas sector include fugitive methane
emissions from upstream and downstream operations in Colorado as well as
on-site combustion of fossil fuels in industrial operations. Passenger vehicles
are the largest contributor to transportation emissions in the state, followed
by large trucks and air travel. Remaining direct emissions come from
manufacturing and other industries, building energy use (especially space

98

heating and water heating), agriculture, waste, refrigerants, and coal
mining.xliv
Figure 20: 2020 CO GHG Emissions (MMT CO2e, AR5 100-yr GWP)

Model Framework
This analysis uses E3’s PATHWAYS model to create distinct scenarios of
future energy demand and GHG pollution in Colorado. The model is built
using a “bottom-up” accounting of all energy-consuming devices and their
pollution for key sectors of the economy along with a more general
accounting of all energy demand and pollution for sectors where device-level
data are not readily available. Scenarios are designed to test “what if”
questions and to provide a comparison of emissions reductions under a range
of mitigation measures.

99

PATHWAYS also captures interactions between demand and supply-side
variables (e.g., electrification of space heating leads to a reduction in fossil
methane demand and its related emissions, while causing an increase in
electricity demand and any related emissions), with constraints and
assumptions informed by existing analyses of resource availability, technology
performance, and cost.
For key sectors like buildings and transportation, PATHWAYS uses a
bottom-up stock rollover approach primarily based on data from the federal
Energy Information Administration’s National Energy Modeling System that is
validated through benchmarking to historical “top-down” energy consumption
data for Colorado. For certain sectors like industry or off-road transportation
where equipment stock data are not readily available, we benchmark directly
to historical energy consumption data. Non-combustion emissions from
sources like agricultural methane, industrial processes, and oil and gas
extraction are benchmarked to a combination of federal and state data
sources.
The E3 modeling approach also incorporates a detailed representation
of the electric sector using E3’s RESOLVE model. RESOLVE is used to develop
least-cost electricity generation portfolios that achieve Colorado’s policy
goals, including an 80% by 2030 emissions reduction, while maintaining
reliability. Finally, we calculate potential bioenergy supply from a variety of
feedstocks as well as emissions reduction potential for a variety of negative
emissions technologies, including CCUS for industrial process emissions and
the direct air capture of CO2. Figure 20 illustrates the relationship between
the different modules of the analysis.

100

Figure 21: E3 Modeling Framework

More detail on modeling approach and assumptions is available in a
technical appendix that is available on the Roadmap website.

101

102

Scenario Development
For this analysis, E3 developed three distinct scenarios: a Reference
Scenario that reflects a “business-as-usual” projection of energy consumption
and emissions under policies adopted prior to 2019, a 2019 Action Scenario
that includes the impacts of both legislative and regulatory policies and
measures adopted in 2019, and a HB-1261 Targets Scenario that is designed to
meet the state’s goals in 2025, 2030, and 2050.
● Reference Scenario: Includes existing sector-specific policies adopted
before the 2019 legislative session, including the Renewable Portfolio
Standard (RPS) for electricity and federal CAFE standards for passenger
vehicles.
● 2019 Action Scenario: Includes the impact of key policies adopted
during 2019, such as electric sector GHG emissions targets (HB191261), the incorporation of the social cost of carbon in electric sector
planning, (SB19-236), increased efficiency standards for certain
appliances (HB10-1231), and the creation of a Zero Emission Vehicle
(ZEV) program (EO B 2019 002). Since a number of the pieces of
legislation passed in 2019 require regulatory implementation, this
scenario includes what we believe are reasonable assumptions about
implementation.
● HB-1261 Targets Scenario: Includes one illustrative scenario of
sectoral changes and the impacts of additional measures needed to
reach the 2025 target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 26%,
reducing 2030 by 50%, and 2050 emissions by 90% from 2005 levels.

103

Table 8: Key Strategies by Sector in E3 Scenarios
Strategy

Reference

2019 Action

Clean
Electricity

Existing RPS,
announced coal
retirements

80% reduction in pollution
from Colorado generation
by 2030, 95% by 2050
Includes Xcel & Tri-State
commitments and
HB 1261

Building
Efficiency

Utility efficiency
Appliance efficiency
programs,
standards covered under
existing appliance
HB 1231
standards

Appliance efficiency
standards for all end-uses,
efficient building shell
requirements

Building
Electrification

None

Same as Reference

High electrification for all
end-uses

Transportation
Efficiency

CAFE Standards

Same as Reference

CAFE Standards, LDV VMT
reductions

ZEV Standard for LDV,
state EV Plan target of
940,000 EVs by 2030

Aggressive ZEV sales for all
vehicle types
Advanced biofuels and
hydrogen production

EIA AEO 2019
Transportation
Reference
Electrification
Forecast

HB19-1261 Targets

Same as 2019 Action

Low-Carbon
Fuels

Existing ethanol
and biodiesel
blends

Same as Reference

Oil & Gas

Projected oil and
gas production

SB19-181, significant
2019 Updates to AQCC Reg.
reductions in methane
7
emissions

Agriculture

ACRE3

Same as Reference

Soil Health Program

104

Sensitivity Analysis for Impacts of COVID-19 on the Economy
The three core scenarios (Reference, 2019 Action, HB-1261 Targets)
modeled in this study are based on pre-COVID-19 conditions and do not take
into account impacts from the recent COVID-19 pandemic. To reflect some of
the potential impacts from COVID-19, E3 ran sensitivities on the 2019 Action
and HB-1261 Target that included:
● A lower population and household growth rate from 2020 through 2025
to reflect lower migration to Colorado.
● A reduction in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in 2020 consistent with
what has been observed through the first half of this year. Annual VMT
slowly increases back to pre-COVID-19 levels by 2027.
● Flat oil and gas production levels from 2020 through 2030, in
comparison to the production increase seen over the same period in
the three core scenarios.
Scenario Results for 2025 and 2030
E3’s analysis finds that achieving Colorado’s 2025 and 2030 GHG
emissions targets is feasible with existing technologies. However, as shown in
Figure 21 below, this will require additional measures and policies beyond
those that are included in the 2019 Action Scenario. The changes needed
to achieve the 2030 goals rely primarily on existing mature technologies.
Achieving the 2050 goals likely requires innovation to drive costs down and
enable large scale deployment of technologies that are less mature. More
information on the key transformations needed by 2050 is available later in
the report.

105

Figure 22: E3 GHG Emissions Projections by Scenario Through 2030

Making progress towards the 2025 and 2030 goals primarily will rely on
continuing the transition to renewable electricity generation, reducing
methane emissions from oil and gas development and operations,
accelerating the transition to electric cars, trucks and buses, making changes
to transportation planning and infrastructure to reduce the growth in driving,
accelerating improvements to building efficiency and electrification of
buildings, reducing methane emissions from landfills, sewage plants and
agriculture, and investing in natural and working lands and the people who
steward them to help mitigate the impacts of climate change and build
greater resilience.
Impacts of COVID-19 on pollution may be large in the near term, but
long term effects are unknown. The modeled COVID-19 sensitivities show
significantly lower emissions in 2025, although this difference is modeled
conservatively as smaller by 2030 and essentially gone by 2050. The emissions
106

impact of lower population growth, reduced VMT, and flat oil and gas
production is larger in the 2019 Action scenario because of the higher rates of
building and vehicle electrification and lower oil and gas methane leak rate in
the HB-1261 Targets Scenario. It is uncertain what long-standing effects will
be felt after 2030 with respect to how Coloradans live, work, and travel, but
these sensitivities indicate that the impacts in 2025 and 2030 may be
substantial. And while the state is not relying on COVID-19 sensitivity
assumptions for purposes of achieving emission reduction targets, it will
continue to evaluate how they impact actual emissions trajectories over time
and update relevant modeling accordingly.
Figure 23: E3 GHG Emission Projections by Scenario Through 2050

Any deep decarbonization pathway to 2030 and 2050 will require a
transformation in energy infrastructure and consumption patterns. The deep
decarbonization transition in Colorado will be supported by five pillars:
energy efficiency, electrification, low-carbon fuels, decarbonizing
electricity supply, and reducing non-combustion emissions. The scale of
107

transformational change needed in each of these categories for the 2050
targets is illustrated in the figure below.
Figure 24: Five Pillars of Decarbonization in Colorado by Scenario

To meet 2025 and 2030 targets, emissions reductions are needed
across many sectors. Figure 25 below shows the breakdown of emissions
reduction by distinct sets of measures or “wedges” in 2030. The largest near
term gains can be made in electricity generation and oil and gas, but early
effort is also needed in buildings, transportation, industry, refrigerants,
waste reduction, and reducing methane emissions from landfills, sewage
treatment plants, and agricultural operations, waste, and coal mine
methane.

108

Figure 25: Emissions Reduction by Measure in 2030

The clean electricity targets set in 2019 as part of HB 19-1261, along
with additional commitments from Colorado utilities, form the backbone of
deep decarbonization by directly reducing electricity generation emissions
and indirectly enabling greater emission reductions elsewhere through the
electrification of buildings, transportation, and industry. The clean electricity
targets modeled by E3 assume that Xcel Energy and Tri-State’s share of load
is met with carbon-free resources by 2050, while other utilities must meet an
emissions reduction of 80% below 2005 levels by 2050. This is likely a
conservative assumption; other utilities will also be transitioning towards zero
carbon generation. In fact, Platte River Power Authority already has adopted
a resource plan to achieve a 90% reduction by 2030, and Holy Cross Energy
has committed to zero carbon emissions by 2030.

109

Figure 26: Electricity Generation through 2030 in 2019 Action Scenario (left) and HB19-1261 Targets Scenario
(right)

Minimizing the release of methane from the oil and gas industry is
essential to achieving the state’s goals, as these make up the largest source
of non-combustion emissions in the state. Oil and gas production is assumed
to be the same between the three scenarios, with emission reductions coming
from reducing methane emissions leaks in upstream operations and the
downstream distribution system. The forecasts of production emissions and
leak rates were set on the high side of potential outcomes for planning
purposes. Greater leak rate reductions or less production would drive deeper
reductions. Methane is a short-lived but potent climate pollutant, making it a
priority for the state to mitigate impacts in the next ten years. Oil and gas
emission reduction measures are estimated to be low cost, approximately
$4/tonne CO2e relative to the Reference scenario (for comparison, the social
cost of damages caused by carbon emissions is over $50/ton). In the near
term action recommendations developed by the state agencies, a rulemaking
is proposed in 2021 to achieve deeper emissions reductions from the oil and
gas sector than are contained in this illustrative scenario.

110

Figure 27: Methane Emissions in Colorado’s Oil and Gas Sector by Scenario

Energy efficiency in residential and commercial buildings is a noregrets action in the near term. E3’s analysis assumes a transition to 100%
sales of high efficiency appliances and technologies in buildings, which in turn
reduce pollution and costs. Widespread adoption of energy efficiency
improvements in the buildings sector, however, is contingent on continued
advancement of building energy codes, utility incentive and technical
assistance programs, building performance standards, consumer education,
and other actions. Building efficiency measures are estimated to save
$54/tonne CO2e (i.e., cost savings) relative to the Reference scenario in
2030. Because of the challenges in achieving widespread changes to buildings
over relatively short timeframes, the near term action recommendations
assume smaller emissions reductions from the building sector between now
and 2030 than are shown in the illustrative HB-1261 Targets Scenario.
Vehicle and building electrification are very effective at reducing
pollution, but their adoption will take time to ramp up. Electric passenger
vehicles and trucks are more efficient at converting energy to miles traveled,
111

and the electricity they use is increasingly clean, so they reduce pollution
relative to internal combustion engine vehicles. In the illustrative scenario
that achieves the HB 19-1261 targets, E3 assumes a ramp up in the sales of
zero emission vehicles to 70% by 2030, which is a significant departure from
adoption today. This level of transformation will require continued effort
from the state to remove barriers to consumer adoption, install robust EV
charging infrastructure, and plan the electricity grid to accommodate new
levels of electrification. Light duty vehicle electrification is expected to be
very affordable by 2030, E3 estimates cost savings of $172/tonne CO2e in
2030 relative to the Reference scenario. Medium and heavy duty
electrification may take additional time to ramp up— E3’s analysis assumes a
40% sales share of zero-emission trucks by 2030.
One criticism that was raised by a number of stakeholders during the
public process has been a concern that the 2019 Action Scenario assumes a
higher level of light duty EV adoption under current policy than is required by
state ZEV regulations, and that the HB-1261 Targets Scenario assumes a
perhaps too aggressive increase in EV uptake over the next decade. The
numbers included in the 2019 Action Scenario were not arbitrary— they are
normalized to the goals in the state EV plan, and are very similar to market
projections that were developed for the Energy Office by Navigant Consulting
as part of the ZEV rulemaking at the AQCC in 2019. However, in order to
respond to this concern, for the purposes of the near term action
recommendations, the state agency analysis assumes much lower adoption of
EVs by 2030 under current policy, and then proposes additional actions to
achieve emissions reductions from transportation.

112

Figure 28: Vehicle Stock Rollover

MDV and HDV electrification is currently estimated in the E3 model to
be more expensive ($114/tonne CO2e in 2030), which indicates that
technology costs may need to continue to decline- and in some cases or
operating conditions may need to be changed- to maximize benefits of truck
and bus electrification. However, given the trends that we are seeing of
declining battery costs, and lifecycle cost savings already possible in certain
segments of the medium and heavy duty vehicle market, this is likely too
conservative, as these vehicles will be initially deployed in those industry
segments where they are most cost effective.
Electric water heaters and space heating can provide an efficient
alternative to fossil devices, but are less widespread in Colorado. E3 assumes
a 60% sales share of electric heat pumps in space heating and water heating
by 2030, which will require moving quickly to identify least-cost early
adopters and investments in heat pump technology to bring down costs for a
diverse set of buildings. Building electrification is estimated to cost
$55/tonne CO2e relative to the Reference scenario.
It is important to emphasize that there are still substantial
uncertainties about the ultimate pathway towards building decarbonization.
While the HB-1261 Targets Scenario focused on electrification, there is some
potential for other technology pathways to achieve the 2050 targets— such as
mixing green hydrogen into the natural gas distribution system, or the
113

potential for air capture of carbon dioxide as a feedstock for synthetic
methane. While studies in California have found that electrification is likely
the lowest cost option, there are still questions about the lowest cost
pathways in a cold weather state such as Colorado, as well as about the
scalability and costs of the other technology pathways. For this reason, we
recommend that the Roadmap support a broad suite of near term no-regrets
strategies (including building efficiency, electrification, use of bio methane
and hydrogen, and reduction of methane leaks), and that further stakeholder
engagement and analytical work is needed to explore longer term pathways.
We also note that the near term action recommendations assume a smaller
reduction in emissions from the buildings sector (20% rather than 37%) than
are shown in the illustrative HB-1261 Targets Scenario, to reflect the long
lead times necessary to achieve significant changes in the building stock.
Figure 29: Heating Appliance Rollover in HB 1261 Targets Scenario

It will be important to slow the growth of vehicle miles traveled by
providing better alternatives to driving, by encouraging telecommuting, by
factoring GHG pollution into the transportation planning process, and by
making wiser land use decisions. Even with the adoption of zero emissions
vehicles, there will be at least three decades to come with internal
114

combustion engines still on the road, and there are many other co-benefits
associated with lower levels of vehicle miles traveled.
Low carbon fuels will likely play a role as biofuels and hydrogen are
shown to be necessary to reduce emissions in sectors that are difficult to
decarbonize, such as some industrial processes and some portions of the
heavy duty vehicle sector. E3’s analysis finds that low-carbon fuels are
essential after 2030, but that the role of ethanol, biodiesel, biogas, advanced
biofuels, and hydrogen, will need to start ramping up between 2025 and
2030. Promising near term opportunities in Colorado include biogas from
waste sources in Colorado, ethanol with carbon capture and storage, and
renewable diesel for transportation. Low-carbon fuels range in costs ($168 $395/tonne CO2e) based on feedstock, conversion process, and delivery of
fuel. There are unaddressed questions in a number of areas about the indirect
land use impacts of some types of biofuels, and about policy tradeoffs
between investments in ZEV infrastructure and incentives and investments in
biofuels, which need additional stakeholder and analytical work.
Natural and working lands play a crucial role in the state’s low-carbon
future. The total carbon flux between the atmosphere and Colorado’s natural
and working lands sector is currently unquantified. As a result, with the
exception of specific agricultural emissions identified in the technical
appendix available on the State of Colorado website, the natural and working
lands sector is not explicitly modeled in PATHWAYS. However, natural and
working lands have an important role to play in achieving the state’s
emission targets, in addition to the fundamental value they provide in
support of the lives and collective resilience of all Coloradoans. In addition
to identifying near term emission reduction strategies, developing a
comprehensive natural and working lands carbon inventory is a key near term
priority for Colorado, because it is critical for monitoring and verifying land
management activities, policies, and programs that may increase or decrease
carbon sequestration over time.
115

LEADERSHIP AND INNOVATION REQUIRED TO MEET 2050 GHG

All sectors have an important role to play in emissions reductions if
the state is to reach 90% reductions by 2050. There are clear early
priorities for the state to make progress towards 2025 and 2030 targets, but
achieving the state’s science-based 2050 goals will require effort across all
sectors of the economy. Figure 29 below shows a potential breakdown of
emissions reduction by sector. E3’s modeling is only one possible path that
Colorado can take to meet the 2050 goal.
Figure 30: GHG Emissions Reductions by Measure in the HB19-1261 Targets Scenario

Electrification is the largest driver of demand-side emissions
reductions by 2050. Widespread electrification in buildings and
transportation, along with some electrification in the industrial sector, leads
to total electric load more than doubling by 2050 in the HB-1261 Targets
116

Scenario. Electrification, along with energy efficiency, is crucial to reducing
emissions as Colorado’s population is projected to grow at more than twice
the national rate over the next 30 years. Consumers, influenced by state and
federal policy, will drive the pace of adoption for new passenger vehicles and
appliances, which in turn determines a large share of the emissions from
buildings and transportation.
Figure 31: Total Electricity Demand by Sector and Scenario

The vision for a decarbonized future in Colorado requires two key
transformations in the electricity sector: (1) a need to serve increasing
electricity demands due to population growth and electrification of fossil
devices, and (2) a need to significantly reduce emissions from coal and
natural gas generation by developing new renewable resources. This two-fold
challenge will require significant wind and solar resource development in the
state. This level of development offers opportunities to reduce pollution and
create local jobs, but will also require careful land-use planning across the
state.

117

Figure 32: Electricity Generation in 2019 Action (left) and HB19 1261 Targets Scenario (right)

Firm dispatchable capacity is crucial to a reliable electricity system at
high levels of renewables. At high levels of wind and solar deployment, it
becomes increasingly important to have sufficient electric generating
capacity that can be dispatched when winds are not blowing and the sun is
not shining. Current battery storage can help by moving this power within the
day, but as we approach 2050, the electricity system will also need to be able
to function for multi-day periods without significant renewable output. While
the vast majority of generation is projected to come from wind and solar,
these infrequent periods will require firm dispatchable electric resources,
which could include fossil methane (with or without CCUS), bioenergy, use of
renewables to produce hydrogen combined with hydrogen combustion,
nuclear power, or a future long-duration energy storage technology. It is
unclear what the best technological solution will be for this challenge, so
Colorado will work with electric utilities to ensure that a full suite of low or
zero-carbon technologies can compete to fill that role.
Supplying reliable energy to heat homes in winter is essential and
requires careful planning, especially after 2030.

118

To reduce emissions in Colorado’s buildings, a significant effort will be
required to achieve greater efficiency in new appliances and building
envelopes, in addition to strategic electrification of appliances like stoves
(including induction), space heaters and water heaters. A subset of homes
and businesses are cost effective to electrify today, but with consumer
adoption and innovation building electrification is expected to become
increasingly cost competitive by 2030 and beyond.
One key consideration for building electrification is the need to
reliably heat homes in the winter in Colorado, which requires careful electric
sector planning if we shift to primarily electric space heating. E3’s analysis
indicates that Colorado could shift from a summer peaking to a winter
peaking system with the levels of adoption in the HB-1261 Targets Scenario.
Continued research into cold climate air source electric heat pumps and
barriers to electrification in Colorado’s buildings will be essential to the
transition. Winter peak heat impacts can be further mitigated through load
flexibility in space heating and a balanced mix of technologies (such as
ground source heat pumps and combustible fuel backup).
Low-carbon fuels will be necessary to decarbonize sectors that are
difficult to electrify
E3’s analysis finds the most optimal uses for low-carbon fuels in 2050
are in decarbonizing aviation fuel, remaining diesel consumption in
transportation, and remaining natural gas use in industry. While some lowcarbon fuels are used to decarbonize the remaining non-electric fuel demand
in buildings and passenger vehicles, these constitute a small fraction of
energy demand in those sectors. Low-carbon fuels can be sourced from
sustainable biofuels (e.g., methane captured from landfills, agricultural
wastes, forest thinnings) or can be produced by improving current processes
(e.g., ethanol production with CCUS). Low-carbon fuels can also be produced
through electricity for fuels like hydrogen and synthetic fuels. A significant
119

advanced biofuels or electrolytic fuels market will take time to develop in
Colorado and neighboring regions, so it will be essential for Colorado to invest
in research and development towards furthering these different low-carbon
fuel options. New technologies, including electric aircraft, also have the
potential to revolutionize this area.
Figure 33: Total Final Energy Demand in 2050 by Fuel in the HB19-1261 Targets Scenario

Reaching 90% GHG reductions will require significant transformation
of the oil and gas sector, mainly by reducing upstream and downstream
operation leak rates.
The oil and gas sector is a significant source of pollution in Colorado
and production has been growing since 2005 (at least until the industry
downturn starting in early 2020). A key strategy will be identifying and
reducing leak rates in both upstream operations and downstream distribution
of oil and gas. E3’s HB-1261 Targets Scenario assumed a reduction in
upstream leak rate from 4% in 2005 to 0.25% in 2050 and a downstream leak
120

rate reduction from 0.5% in 2005 to 0.15% in 2050. These reductions reflect
realistic targets consistent with SB 19-181 and the goals of leading oil and gas
companies.
Strategic deployment of carbon capture utilization and
sequestration can reduce pollution in key sectors.
Carbon capture technology is not new, but large scale deployment has
been slow especially without an aggressive mandate to reduce emissions or
economic incentive. Carbon capture is most cost-effective and appropriate in
applications with a pure and concentrated stream of CO2 or significant noncombustion process emissions that would not be avoided from fuel switching.
Prime candidates for CCUS in Colorado include ethanol production facilities,
central gas processing operations, and cement manufacturing. This is in
addition to the carbon sequestration potential of Natural and Working Lands.
An example of a CCUS project in development is a joint venture
between Lafarge-Holcim and Oxy Low Carbon venture to capture CO2 from
the Holcim cement plant in Florence, Colorado. The project just received a
$1.5 million federal grant to complete feasibility work for a project that
would remove two million tons of CO2 per year from the cement
manufacturing and natural gas fired steam generator. The CO2 would then be
placed into a nearby pipeline and then injected underground to sequester the
carbon.
Continued engagement with these industries will be needed to
determine the appropriate sites and timing of CCUS deployment, in addition
to the proximity to appropriate carbon sequestration and utilization
opportunities. Further work will also be necessary to assess and address any
regulatory barriers to capture and sequester carbon in the state. It is
anticipated that a CCUS Task Force will be established to assist the state to
evaluate the legal and technical steps toward implementation of CCUS.

121

Strategic efforts in the natural and working lands sector will be
necessary to further reduce associated GHG pollution, and protect and
enhance the ability for Colorado’s lands to sequester carbon from the
atmosphere.
Long-term priority actions include enhancing land conservation and
reducing the conversion of native grassland, forests, and pastureland to
cropland, energy development, or urban and suburban development. Land
conservation should complement sustainable land use planning efforts to
reduce transportation and other emissions associated with development.
Additional key strategies include reforestation and afforestation of wildfire
burn scars, urban and suburban areas, and wind breaks in agricultural
landscapes, while acknowledging that these practices must be equitable and
adaptive to ongoing climate change and the availability of water resources.
Additionally, increases in place-appropriate practices such as cover cropping
and cropland nutrient management will achieve substantial emissions
reductions from the agricultural sector, and the pace and scale of forest
management must be increased substantially to maintain forest health and
reduce wildfire severity.

122

PRIOR ACTION TO REDUCE GHG POLLUTION

Because of early actions and commitments to addressing the climate
crisis, Colorado has made significant progress on a transition to renewable
energy, electric vehicles, and reducing GHG pollution. This work would not
have been possible without a strong partnership among the General Assembly,
public interest groups, private sector leaders, local governments and the
public.

Earlier Climate Plans
In 2007 Governor Bill Ritter, Jr., released the Colorado Climate Action
Plan: A Strategy to Address Global Warming. The plan concluded that the
scientific evidence for human-caused climate was clear. Governor Ritter
called global warming, “Our generation’s greatest environmental
challenge.”xlv The plan also described three principal roles for state
government: enacting bridge strategies that immediately reduce greenhouse
gas pollution while we pursue technologies to generate cleaner energy;
providing leadership to ensure that long-term solutions, such as renewable
energy, are fully developed and broadly implemented; and preparing the
state to adapt to those climate changes that cannot be avoided.
The plan established a goal of an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas
pollution by 2050 from 2005 levels. To make progress towards this goal, the
2007 plan established a goal of increasing renewable energy and reducing
GHG pollution from electric utilities by 20% by 2020. The plan also called on
state agencies to partner with research institutions and industry to develop
ways to prevent methane leakage from oil and gas drilling; established goals
for diverting waste from landfills; directed state government to reduce
energy consumption in state buildings and vehicles; and sought to develop a
123

workforce that would make Colorado a leader in the emerging new energy
economy.
In 2014, Governor Hickenlooper released a Colorado Climate Plan that
identified a number of opportunities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at
the agency level and recommended a number of actions to help improve
Colorado’s ability to adapt to future climate change impacts and to increase
the levels of preparedness of Colorado’s state agencies. In 2017, Governor
Hickenlooper signed an executive order committing the state to further
climate action, including reducing statewide greenhouse gas emissions 26% by
2025 from 2005 levels. Governor Hickenlooper issued an updated Climate Plan
in 2018, which identified opportunities to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
and promoted state policy recommendations and actions that increase
Colorado's level of preparedness for impacts of a changing climate.

Clean Energy & Efficiency Legislation & Regulatory Actions
Colorado has taken significant legislative and regulatory action to
reduce GHG pollution. In 2004, Colorado voters passed Amendment 37, which
set a renewable energy target of 10% by 2020 for investor-owned utilities.
The legislature has amended the RPS several times, including adopting
changes that expanded the requirement for behind the meter generation,
increasing the renewable energy target to 30% by 2020 for investor-owned
utilities, and establishing renewable energy targets for rural electric
cooperatives and municipal utilities.xlvi
Colorado adopted legislation in 2007 that created an energy efficiency
resource standard by requiring the Public Utilities Commission to establish
energy and demand savings goals for regulated gas and electric utilities. In
2017 the law was extended to require regulated utilities to offer electric
efficiency programs through 2028. As part of the update to the EERS, the PUC
is required to set goals of at least 5% peak demand reduction and 5% energy
savings by 2028.
124

In 2010, the state adopted the Clean Air Clean Jobs Act, which
required regulated utilities to file with the PUC plans to reduce emissions
from coal-fired power plants. Xcel Energy filed a plan addressing 900
megawatts (MW) of coal-fired generation and the PUC ultimately approved a
plan to retire 597 MW of coal-fired generation.xlvii
In 2014, Colorado became the first state to adopt regulations to reduce
methane emissions from both new and existing oil and gas well operations.
The regulations have served as a model for subsequent federal and state
regulations in the sector. In 2018, the Colorado Air Pollution Control Division
determined that in the intervening years following the implementation of the
regulations (2015-2017) the number of methane leaks had fallen by 52%.
In 2014, as part of the settlement of litigation around a State
Implementation Plan to reduce Regional Haze, the owners of the Nucla coalfired power plant agreed to accelerate the retirement date for the plant to
2022. The agreement was later amended to include the early retirement of a
second coal-fired plant, Craig 1 in 2025. The updated plan was approved by
the state Air Quality Control Commission on December 15, 2016, and
approved by the Environmental Protection Agency on July 5, 2018.
Ultimately, the Nucla plant was retired more than two years earlier than the
date set out in the settlement.
In 2016, Xcel Energy filed an electric resource plan with the PUC.
During the proceeding, Xcel and more than 20 different groups joined
together to present the PUC with the Colorado Energy Plan- an agreement
that proposed to retire two coal-fired power plants and replace them with
1,100 MW of new wind generation and 700 MW of solar, while saving
customers a projected $200 million. The Colorado Energy Plan proposed to
retire Comanche unit 1 (325 MW) in 2022, 11 years ahead of schedule, and to
retire Comanche unit 2 (335 MW) in 2025, a decade ahead of schedule.
According to analysis submitted with the plan, Xcel Energy will cut its carbon
125

emissions from electricity generation 60% by late 2025 from 2005 levels. The
plan was projected to create nearly 2,000 jobs and add $203.6 million in GDP
statewide. The PUC approved the plan in 2018.
In 2018, the AQCC adopted the Colorado Low Emission Automobile
Regulation (CLEAR) in response to efforts at the federal level to roll back
vehicle emission standards. CLEAR established low-emission vehicle standards
for light-duty and medium-duty vehicles in Colorado beginning with the 2022
model year. CLEAR is projected to reduce GHG pollution by more than 30
million tons cumulatively between 2022 and 2031, compared to a scenario in
which federal standards are relaxed, and to provide net savings to Colorado
drivers through reduced fuel costs due to greater vehicle efficiency.

126

PROGRESS UNDER THE POLIS ADMINISTRATION

Renewables Roadmap
In June of 2019, Governor Polis released the Roadmap to 100%
Renewable Energy by 2040 and Bold Climate Action, which included a number
of key priorities and strategies, including growing green jobs and saving
consumers money; modernizing the Public Utilities Commission; promoting
Energy Efficiency; putting more zero emission vehicles and commuting
options on Colorado roads; moving toward zero emission buildings; supporting
local commitment to 100% renewable energy; and ensuring a just and
equitable transition for all of Colorado. Since the release of the 2019
Roadmap, the state has taken a number of important steps towards the
identified priorities. This Roadmap builds on that work.

Recent Legislation
In 2019, the General Assembly passed and Governor Polis signed into
law 14 pieces of clean energy and climate legislation, including the Climate
Action Plan, which established GHG pollution reduction goals. Other
legislation required local jurisdictions to adopt one of the three most recent
versions of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC); created
pathways for electric utilities to invest in clean energy; modernized the
Public Utilities Commission; adopted new energy efficiency standards for
appliances; and required investor-owned utilities to invest in electrifying
transportation.
While COVID-19 impacted many climate and clean energy priorities for
the 2020 legislative session, Colorado continued pushing forward by creating
a new Air Quality Enterprise (SB20-204) to protect air quality and advance air
127

monitoring research, adding staff to the Air Pollution Control Division to
address stationary source emissions, increasing fines and reporting
requirements for air quality violations (HB 20-1143 and HB 20-1265),
increasing the availability of new all-electric cars and trucks in Colorado, and
supporting greater consumer choice in the future (SB20-167).

Electricity
Electricity has historically been the largest single source of greenhouse
gas pollution in Colorado, driven primarily by emissions from coal-fired power
plants. A lesser portion of emissions come from natural gas power plants.
However, pollution from electricity has been trending downwards for the last
15 years, driven by public policy and by changes in technology and
economics. As wind and solar have been deployed on a large scale, their cost
has come down dramatically through a combination of technical
improvements, economies of scale, and advances in forecasting and the
ability to cost effectively integrate renewable energy into the grid. This has
led to new wind and solar generation often being less expensive than
continuing to operate existing coal-fired power plants.
In the last two years, the clean energy transition has accelerated. The
administration’s strategy for the electricity sector has been to focus on
achieving deep reductions in pollution (at least 80% by 2030) enabled by the
declining cost of wind, solar, and storage, while using the expertise of utility
boards and the PUC to ensure this transition is accomplished in a way that
maintains reasonably priced electricity and the reliability of the system.
While many of these plans were voluntarily developed by the utilities, a
variety of state regulatory structures will allow these plans to be made
enforceable, including placing announced coal plant retirements into
enforceable State Implementation Plans (SIPs) for reducing regional haze or
through the Clean Energy Plan approval processes.

128

Xcel Energy, the largest utility in the state, made a voluntary
commitment to reduce GHG pollution by 80% below 2005 levels by 2030; SB
19-236 built on this voluntary commitment by requiring Xcel Energy to submit
a Clean Energy Plan to the PUC that will achieve an 80% carbon reduction by
2030. Xcel is required to file its Clean Energy Plan in March 2021. This plan
will build on an approved plan that will retire the Comanche 1 and 2 coal
units (totaling 660 MW) in Pueblo roughly a decade early and replace them
with a combination of wind, solar, and storage. As part of its transition to
clean electricity generation, Xcel Energy agreed with the Evraz steel mill to
construct a 250 MW solar plant on the mill’s grounds—the largest behind the
meter project in the country. This project will provide low cost, clean
electricity at a reliable price, which enabled Evraz to announce a $480
million improvement to the Pueblo mill, including a guarantee of 1,000
jobs.xlviii
Xcel Energy also signed a settlement agreement with the City of
Boulder to end a 10-year dispute over whether Boulder will form a municipal
electric utility. Boulder voters approved the agreement in the 2020 election,
which sets pre-2030 GHG emissions targets, committing Xcel Energy to
greenhouse gas pollution reductions of 52% by 2022, 61% by 2024 and 67% by
2027. In January, 2021, Xcel Energy announced plans for the early retirement
of two additional coal plants, Hayden Unit 1 in 2028 and Hayden Unit 2 in
2027.
The combination of SB 19-236 and HB 19-1261 creates strong incentives
for other utilities to reduce their pollution. Under part of SB 19-236, any
utility is permitted to file a Clean Energy Plan that reduces carbon emissions
by 80% by 2030 with the PUC. If a utility’s CEP meets this reduction target
and is approved by the PUC, the AQCC grants the utility a “safe harbor” from
additional regulation of carbon emissions through 2030. The administration
has encouraged utilities to voluntarily adopt energy plans that will achieve
these goals and to file CEPs as a mechanism to achieve deep pollution
129

reductions and a quick transition to renewables. The state will continue to
coordinate with utilities and report annually to the AQCC regarding their
intent to file and implement CEPs.
The state’s other electric utilities with coal plants have announced
plans to retire coal-fired generation and replace it with renewable energy
and storage. The state’s second largest utility, Tri-State Generation and
Transmission, historically has been reliant on coal-fired generation including
the Nucla plant and three coal-fired units located in Craig, Colorado. The
three Craig Station units total 1,285 MW. Prior to 2019, Tri-State did not
submit its resource plans to the PUC for approval. With the passage and
signing of SB 19-236, Tri-State must now get approval of its Electric Resource
Plan from the PUC. While Craig Unit 1 (427 MW) was scheduled for retirement
in 2025, Craig unit 2 (410 MW) was anticipated to stay in operation through
2039 and Craig unit 3 (448 MW) was projected to run through 2044.xlix In 2019,
new leadership at Tri-State worked with the administration and a variety of
stakeholders to develop a new “Responsible Energy Plan,” which commits to
closing all Colorado coal-fired generation by 2030, and commits to closing the
mines associated with those plants. As a result of these closures, the plan
reduces emissions from generation located in Colorado by 90% and emissions
from generation serving Colorado load by 70% (this reflects the fact that some
electricity used in Colorado comes from coal generation in Wyoming). At the
time the plan was announced, Tri-State’s CEO described the “green
dividend,” in which low cost solar and wind would allow the company to
make these changes without negatively impacting ratepayers — in fact, they
project an 8% decrease in wholesale electricity prices over the next three
years. Tri-State also selected developers to add 1,000 MW of wind and solar
in five locations across the state. More recently, Tri-State submitted a
resource plan to the PUC in December 2020 that targets an 80% reduction in
emissions from the generation that serves load in Colorado.

130

Colorado Springs Utilities, the state’s third largest utility, which serves
Colorado Springs and is governed by the city, is also making voluntary efforts
to reduce its reliance on coal-fired generation. In June 2020, the City
Council, acting as the utility board, voted to retire the Drake coal-fired unit
by 2023, roughly 12 years ahead of schedule, and to retire the Ray Nixon
plant by 2030. The plan presented to the board calls for 500 MW of wind
power generation capacity, 150 MW of solar, and more than 400 MW of
battery storage, reducing GHG pollution by 80% by 2030. Colorado Springs
Utilities has announced that it will submit this as a clean energy plan to the
PUC.
The Platte River Power Authority (PRPA), the fourth largest utility in
the state, provides power to the municipal utilities serving Estes Park,
Longmont, Loveland, and Fort Collins. In fall of 2020, the PRPA board voted
to approve an electric resource plan that includes retiring the Rawhide coal
plant by 2030, years ahead of schedule, and adding 400 megawatts of
renewable generation. PRPA’s analysis shows that the plan will reduce
greenhouse gas pollution by 90% by 2030. PRPA has committed to submitting
this as a clean energy plan to the PUC.
Holy Cross Energy, one of the largest rural cooperatives that is not a
wholesale customer of Tri-State, announced in December of 2020 that it is
committing to 100% carbon free generation by 2030. This builds upon its
previous adopted plan to achieve 70% by 2030, which it now anticipates
achieving in 2021, and represents a new bar for utility ambition in
decarbonization. Holy Cross has also announced its intent to file its plan as a
clean energy plan with the PUC.
In the fall of 2019, Black Hills Energy filed voluntarily with the PUC to
amend its current electric resource plan. In its filing, Black Hills stated that
its goal was to add up to 200 MW of new renewable resources while saving
money for its customers by avoiding burning fossil methane. At the time this
131

Roadmap was developed the case was still before the PUC. In January 2021
Black Hills announced its intent to file a clean energy plan that will achieve
an 80% pollution reduction by 2030.
In addition to the work the state is doing with utilities to reach deep
pollution reduction, the State Land Board is providing opportunities for
renewable energy development on state lands. The State Land Board has
signed renewable energy leases for projects that will increase installed
production capacity on State Trust Land to 520 MW, enough energy to power
150,000 homes in Colorado, and generate revenue for Colorado’s public
schools.
One important benefit flowing from the rapid transition towards clean
electricity is that it magnifies the pollution reduction, public health, and
other benefits of electrification in other sectors, such as cars and buildings.

132

Transportation
In 2020, transportation overtook electricity generation as the largest
source of greenhouse gas pollution in Colorado, consistent with the trend
nationwide. That is why the state is working to develop policies and
strategies that will reduce emissions in this sector by making cars, trucks, and
buses cleaner, by reducing the number of miles traveled, and by helping local
governments invest in infrastructure to reduce the need to drive.
Colorado’s EV Plan
In 2020, the Colorado Energy
Office updated the state’s EV
plan. The plan presents a
framework for transitioning
vehicles in Colorado, setting a
goal of increasing the number of
light-duty cars and trucks to
940,000 by 2030. In support of the
goal, the plan also calls for
transitioning medium-duty (MDV)
and heavy-duty (HDV) vehicles to
zero emission vehicles;
undertaking a gap analysis to
identify the type and number of
charging stations needed across
the state to meet the state’s
vehicle electrification goals; and
for state government agencies
lead by example.

Shortly after taking office, one of
Governor Polis’ first executive orders, Executive
Order B 2019-002, “Supporting a Transition to
Zero-Emission Vehicles,” committed the state
to a large-scale transition to zero emission
vehicles and identified several key initiatives in
support of this goal. The order directed CDPHE
to develop a rule to establish a zero emission
vehicle program under Section 177 of the Clean
Air Act, including proposing adoption of the rule
to the AQCC by May 2019, and requiring
consideration of adoption by October 30, 2019.
It also required CDPHE and its partner agencies
to revise the state’s Volkswagen Settlement
Beneficiary Mitigation Plan to direct all
remaining funds to transportation
electrification projects, a process that was
completed by September of 2019. Finally,

Executive Order B 2019-002 laid the foundation for a number of subsequent
bills and initiatives over the course of 2019 and 2020 in support of greater
transportation electrification.
The AQCC adopted Low Emission Vehicle Standards on November 16,
2018. In August 2019, the AQCC subsequently adopted Zero Emission Vehicle
133

Standards. With that decision, Colorado became the first state in nearly a
decade to adopt a ZEV regulation and the first ever to do so with support of
automakers. State agencies negotiated an approach that created incentives
for early deployment of ZEVs, which resulted in the associations representing
99% of auto sales supporting the proposed rule. These regulations start with
model years 2022 and 2023 vehicles, respectively, and will allow Colorado to
continue making progress on improving the sustainability of its transportation
system despite federal government inaction and the roll back of nationwide
emissions standards. In particular, the ZEV standard will require auto
manufacturers to make a greater number and variety of clean vehicles
available to Colorado consumers. Colorado’s program also contains a
provision that allows manufacturers to earn early action credit against their
requirement by making EVs available as early as the 2021 model year. The
early action credit could result in Colorado being one of the first states to
receive electrified SUVs and trucks. Finally, Colorado’s ZEV program also
establishes a process for tracking and increasing the percentage of ZEVs on
the road in the years to come.
A ZEV program is just one strategy needed to help the state reach its
goal of 940,000 EVs by 2030. A 2019 analysis conducted by Navigant for the
Colorado Energy Office looked at three different EV growth scenarios and
found that while the ZEV program is critical to ensuring increased model
availability, achievement of the state’s goal will also require a significant and
long term utility investment in charging infrastructure and a multi-year
consumer education and awareness campaign. The analysis also stated that
continuation of the state Innovative Motor Vehicle Credit, albeit at a lower
level, would be needed through at least 2025 to achieve the State’s 2030
goal.
The Colorado Legislature passed several new laws in 2019 that support
transportation electrification. The actions taken under these statutes will
reinforce one another and the goals and strategies of the Colorado
134

Department of Transportation’s Clean Transportation Plan and the updated
Colorado Electric Vehicle Plan 2020. CDOT has enhanced its focus on
electrification of transit fleets and is supporting zero emission vehicle
adoption throughout the state through consumer education, investment in
charging infrastructure programs, and additional measures to reduce
emissions. CDOT is working to expand multimodal options through its intercity
bus service, Bustang, as well as the continued development and construction
of mobility hubs – transportation centers that emphasize multimodal options.
In addition, CDOT continues to support local transit agencies across the state,
which provide critical transportation services and driving alternatives to
diverse populations throughout the state.
SB 19-077, one of the bills passed in the 2019 legislative session,
supports vehicle electrification for Colorado homes and business, including
vehicle and transportation fleets. The statute requires Colorado’s two
investor-owned electric utilities, Black Hills and Xcel Energy, to file plans
with the Public Utilities Commission for how they will invest in vehicle
electrification and requires utilities to include in those plans investments that
serve historically disadvantaged communities. The statute authorizes the
utilities to provide electric vehicle charging as a service to customers, allows
the utilities to provide incentives to customers, and to support customers’
investments in charging infrastructure. To ensure that there is competition in
the EV charging marketplace, the law requires the utilities to apply to the
Public Utilities Commission to build facilities to support EVs.
In May 2020, Xcel Energy and Black Hills Energy submitted their first
Transportation Electrification Plans to the PUC. Xcel Energy's 3-year $130
million proposal included a wide range of programs for residential customers
in single-family and multi-family homes as well as programs for small and

135

Equity in Xcel’s TEP
In the PUC case addressing
Xcel’s TEP, the state advocated
for using the Equity Framework
as a key tool for identifying
impacted communities and for
how utilities should engage
with identified communities to
better understand their goals
and interests in vehicle
electrification. CEO also
advocated that the framework
and outreach should be used to
help determine how funds
should be allocated.

large businesses. Xcel’s plan proposed funding for
advisory services and research and innovation for
projects such as electrification of shared mobility,
optimization solutions for fleets, and electrification
of school buses. In December 2020, the PUC voted
to approve a $110 transportation electrification
plan for Xcel that includes investment in new electric
vehicle infrastructure, residential home charging, and
programs to support electrification of vehicle fleets and
multi-family homes. The Commission provided emphasis
on support for programs that benefit lower income
households and communities impacted by transportation
pollution, including $2.2 million to support

electrification of buses and $5million for rebates for customers who qualify based on
income to purchase electric vehicles. to ensure that the benefits of electrification
are broadly shared.

The Black Hills Energy Ready EV plan would offer rebates for
installation of charging stations to single and multifamily residences,
businesses, governments, and nonprofits. Black Hills Energy also proposes
customer and auto dealership outreach and education. Both Xcel Energy and
Black Hills Energy have proposed expanded offerings for lower-income
customers, in order to support an equitable transition to electrified
transportation.
Other supporting measures passed in 2019 included HB 19-1159, which
extended existing income tax credits for the purchase or lease of alternative
fuel vehicles (including EVs) through 2025, while ratcheting them down over
time. HB 19-1159 also allows Transportation Network Companies, like Lyft
and Uber, that offer leased EVs to their drivers under short term rental
programs to claim the full tax credit. This last provision helped Lyft deploy
200 Kia Niro EVs in Denver in November 2019, the single largest EV
deployment made by a TNC to date. Concurrently, HB 19-1198 modified the
136

statute governing the electric vehicle grant fund to allow fees collected on EV
registrations to be used for administrative costs associated with making
charging station grants and to offset charging station operating costs. HB 191298 established signage procedures and penalties for non-charging vehicles
parked in designated EV charging spots to safeguard access to public charging
infrastructure, including those EV stations funded using the grant funds
addressed above.
Finally, SB 19-239 directed CDOT to examine the environmental,
congestion, and social impacts of technological and business model changes
related to commercial vehicles and convene a stakeholder working group to
develop recommendations on how best to mitigate these impacts, including
via a potential fee structure. CDOT released its findings in fall 2019, setting
the stage for future efforts aimed at electrifying these emerging commercial
vehicle types before they worsen air quality and increase GHG emissions over
the longer-term.
In 2020, the General Assembly passed SB 20-167, which allows EV
manufacturers to sell directly to customers if they only make EVs and have no
franchised dealers. This will help to increase the availability of new allelectric cars and trucks in Colorado and will support greater consumer choice.
In July 2020 the state announced the launch of a Colorado Clean
Trucking Strategy aimed at formulating a cohesive and comprehensive plan to
reduce the air quality and GHG impacts of the medium and heavy duty
vehicle sector. Reducing pollution from M/HD vehicles is particularly
important because M/HD vehicles are major sources of nitrogen oxide
pollution, which contributes to ozone formation. The particulate emissions
from diesel vehicles have serious health impacts, especially in
disproportionately impacted communities. Transitioning to much cleaner and
zero emissions trucks in one of the most important strategies to
simultaneously address GHG pollution and local air pollution.
137

To advance the Clean Trucking Strategy, Colorado is working in
partnership with the Colorado Motor Carriers Association and vehicle
manufacturers, electric utilities, environmental advocacy groups,
environmental justice communities, and local governments. The state held
three public meetings between August and October 2020, bringing more than
200 attendees from across the state into the Clean Truck conversation. The
state is pursuing a wide-ranging strategy that will include evaluating a
potential ZEV regulation for medium and heavy duty vehicles, potential new
regulations of nitrogen oxide emissions from trucks, voluntary vehicle
efficiency improvements, utility infrastructure investments, integration of
electrification considerations in highway infrastructure improvements,
incentives for cleaner trucks, ZEV workforce development, and state
government leadership by example.
At the same time that Colorado launched this internal state effort, it
also signed on to a Memorandum of Understanding with 14 other states and
the District of Columbia committing to work collaboratively to advance and
accelerate the market for electric M/HD vehicles, including large pickup
trucks and vans, delivery trucks, box trucks, school and transit buses, and
big-rig long-haul delivery trucks. The goal of the multistate MOU is to ensure
that 100 percent of all new M/HD vehicle sales will be zero emission vehicles
by 2050 with an interim target of 30 percent zero emission vehicle sales by
2030.
The state has made progress in ensuring Coloradans can drive
anywhere in Colorado in an EV and find a place to “fill-up” their battery. In
April 2019, CEO issued a $10.33 million grant to ChargePoint to build highspeed charging stations in 34 communities along Colorado’s interstate as well
as state and US highways. ChargePoint has partnered with a variety of public
and private site hosts all over Colorado, with each location selected for its
proximity to amenities and ability to ensure quick, convenient charging. Each
site will allow two-to-four cars to charge at a time, and each site will be built
138

so that as more EVs begin driving on Colorado’s roads, the number of vehicles
that can charge and the charging speed can be expanded in a cost-effective
way. In 2020, stations will open in Dinosaur, Salida, and Pagosa Springs as
well as nine other locations. Twenty-two more stations are projected to come
online by spring 2021. In addition, through the Charge Ahead Colorado grant
program, the state has made awards for installation of more than one
thousand community-based Level 2 and DC fast-charging stations at
workplaces, multi-family housing, commercial facilities, and public parking
lots and garages.
Outside of the vehicle electrification space, the state is also moving
towards a strategy of better accounting and mitigation for the pollution
impacts of infrastructure, and towards an approach that focuses on providing
more mobility options to travelers, including transit and active mobility
options like walking or biking. For example, as the state begins its community
input process for the reconstruction of I-270, a highly trafficked thoroughfare
that traverses Commerce City— an important environmental justice
community —CDOT is pursuing a range of new strategies, previously
unprecedented in the agency’s approach, to better measure air quality
impacts at the outset as a baseline for mitigation, and to work with the
community to identify advanced mitigation options to incorporate into the
project. This builds on lessons learned from evaluation of the Central I-70
project through Denver, and CDOT intends to carry these practices into other
capacity projects moving forward.
CDOT and the Denver Regional Council of Governments have
collaborated on a new model for making funding available to make urban
arterial roadways into “safer main streets” for all modes of transportation
including walking, transit, and biking— including through an allocation of
more than $75 million dollars of current road and multimodal funds that are
139

in the process of being awarded competitively through this program. This is
one of the highest priorities included in CDOT’s 10-year infrastructure plan,
“Your Transportation Plan,” and will provide safety and multimodal
transportation benefits to all Coloradans.
Importantly, CDOT is also working closely with the Front Range Rail
Commission to accelerate completion of program options and a surface
development plan for Front Range Rail, in conjunction with work to build
demand and make anchor investments in transit along the I-25 corridor
through a network of multimodal hubs along the corridor. Several of these
mobility hubs are already funded and others would be funded as part of
CDOT’s 10-year plan, which will provide transit corridor rapid bus service as
planning for Front Range Rail continues. Additionally, the administration is
working to ensure that RTD funds completion of Northwest rail, consistent
with the Fastracks plan adopted by voters in 2004. The project is projected
to have ridership of 8,600-10,100 people daily on rail by 2025 according to
the binding plan adopted by voters.

Buildings
While Colorado’s electricity and transportation sectors are the top two
sources of climate warming pollution, fuel use in residential, commercial, and
industrial buildings is not far behind. Achieving the state’s pollution reduction
goals will require significant reductions in this sector. Integrating more
energy efficiency with the expanded use of clean electricity as an alternative
to burning fossil fuels in buildings could bring consumer cost savings, enhance
electric grid operations, reduce GHG pollution, and improve indoor air
quality. The state has taken a number of steps to advance building efficiency
and is engaging in a variety of programs and strategies to decarbonize the
built environment. It is also important to note that energy costs can be a
significant burden for lower-income Coloradans; while the average household
140

spends approximately 2% of its income on energy, many low income
households may spend more than 10% of their income on energy costs. It is
important that building sector programs, including energy efficiency and solar
programs that can reduce household energy costs, be designed to benefit
these energy burdened households.
The Weatherization Assistance Program serves approximately 2,000 low
income households per year out of roughly 500,000 eligible households.
Participation in the program is based on income; the household income
threshold for WAP qualification is approximately $35,000 per year. However,
WAP-served households have a median income of about $13,000 per year.
WAP served homes save an average of $350 per year, but savings can range
from less than $100 to more than $800 depending on the energy efficiency
and renewable energy measures installed in the home.l In addition to energy
savings, weatherized homes reduce GHG pollution by 3,500 pounds of carbondioxide emissions each year. WAP installed measures go beyond energy
savings and produce improved indoor environmental quality through air
sealing and reduction of carbon-monoxide.
The state passed legislation in 2019 to expand the number of products
covered under appliance efficiency standards (HB 19-1231) and updated the
building energy code statute (HB 19-1260) to require local building codes to
be at least as strong as one of the three most recent versions of the
International Energy Conservation Code. The state supports local governments
in adopting these codes by providing no-cost technical assistance and training
to county and municipal building departments. In addition, to increase
education and awareness of the benefits of newer energy codes, the CEO
created an Energy Code Adoption Toolkit that details significant changes and
provides a cost comparison between code editions, has examples of advanced
codes, and includes code compliance checklists.

141

The state also supported the adoption of the 2021 IECC, which
achieves an estimated 10% greater efficiency than the prior code. The 2021
IECC will be the first code in several cycles that has achieved this level of
energy savings and puts codes on a path toward increasing efficiency and
performance standards, setting the stage for future codes to enable new
buildings to produce net zero emissions. Requirements in the draft 2021 IECC
that buildings be pre-wired for future installation of electric appliances and
EV charging infrastructure were unfortunately removed by the International
Code Council board before publication despite the overwhelming support
from state and local governmental voting members for these requirements.
The state will still encourage local governments to adopt these requirements.
The Colorado Energy Office and the Division of Housing within the
Colorado Department of Local Affairs worked with the Colorado Housing and
Finance Authority to modify the 2020 Qualified Allocation Plan, which
outlines criteria for awarding tax credits to developers and investors for
affordable housing projects in Colorado. The updated criteria encourage
developers to design housing that meets higher efficiency standards such as
the U.S. Department of Energy’s Zero Energy Ready Home or Passive House
certifications. The update also includes electric vehicle ready parking space
requirements, mandates energy-use intensity reporting, and adds criteria to
assess the future retrofit needs of the building, ongoing utility costs, and
housing density.
In 2020, the Colorado Energy Office funded a beneficial electrification
potential study that estimates the technical, economic, and achievable
potentials for BE in buildings in Colorado over the next ten years. The
research identifies key technologies and sectors that can benefit from this
transition. The report also analyzes market barriers that will impede
electrification efforts and provides policy and program recommendations to
accelerate the adoption of BE technologies. The report is available on the
Colorado Energy Office website.
142

The Colorado Energy Office is also in the process of launching a
commercial building benchmarking program. The program, when fully
developed, will enable building owners to report energy use data to a
statewide database. The program will work to modernize utility data
protocols to improve customer access to building level energy data. Making
whole building energy use data more transparent will also help identify costeffective opportunities for energy efficiency and beneficial electrification
upgrades.
CEO provides a number of commercial and residential financing
programs that support Coloradans investing in energy efficiency and
renewable energy to reduce pollution from the built environment and help
customers save money. CEO manages a statewide residential energy upgrade
loan program, called RENU, that provides low-interest financing to residential
homeowners for energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements. With
extended loan terms and the ability for borrowers with lower credit scores to
qualify, RENU makes investing in energy upgrades more accessible to
Coloradans. Eligible measures include insulation, air sealing, energy-efficient
windows, efficient space conditioning and water heating equipment, heat
pumps and heat pump water heaters, and solar PV systems. RENU has
approximately 140 authorized contractors statewide that are qualified to
offer this loan.
The state also has a Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy
financing tool that enables owners of eligible commercial and industrial
buildings to finance up to 100% of energy efficiency, renewable energy and
water conservation improvements. Financing is provided by private capital
providers at competitive rates with repayment terms up to 25 years.
Repayment of the financing occurs through a voluntary assessment on their
property tax bill. Pending federal reforms, PACE for residential also can
provide increased low-cost financing opportunities for investments like home
solar.
143

The Energy Performance Contracting Program is an innovative
financing model that enables state and local governments, school districts,
special districts, and higher education institutions to make comprehensive
energy and water efficiency facility improvements by using guaranteed utility
savings to repay the costs of the upgrades over time. Colorado’s energy
performance contracting program provides the framework and technical
assistance to help public facilities lower their annual utility and operations
and maintenance costs and improve building performance.
In addition to providing direct access to funding, and in partnership
with the Department of Energy and the Coalition for Green Capital, CEO
supported the formation of the Colorado Clean Energy Fund to identify
strategies for accelerating clean energy investment in Colorado. CCEF is a
non-profit financial institution that seeks to increase clean energy
deployment and investment in Colorado and operates on the “Green Bank”
model pioneered successfully in other states. CCEF has identified a strong
pipeline of projects that need investment and has developed the
infrastructure to support these projects, but is in the process of raising
capital to be able to fund these investments. As described in the near term
action section, the administration is seeking $30 million in supplemental
stimulus funding in the 2021 legislative session to capitalize the CCEF. The
state is also seeking zero interest financing from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture to support CCEF loans to support energy efficiency retrofits for
low and moderate income households and C-PACE loans for small businesses
in rural areas and just transition communities.
Colorado first adopted gas and electric energy efficiency requirements
for investor owned utilities in 2007. An independent analysis concluded that
Colorado home and business owners will save over $1.5 billion as a result of
the efficiency investments made by Black Hills and Xcel Energy, or about $4
on their utility bill for every $1 spent by the utility. In addition to reducing

144

energy use and costs to consumers, the programs from the two utilities have
reduced cumulative CO2 emissions during 2009-18 by 13 million metric tons.li

Oil and Gas
Colorado has a significant amount of oil and fossil methane production
and has experienced sustained growth in production in the last decade.
Despite the substantial growth in production, methane emissions from oil and
gas operations are estimated to have generally remained flat between 2005
and 2015 due to increased regulatory requirements adopted by the AQCC that
have led to a declining leak rate from the sector. Colorado has been a leader
in developing environmental regulations for the oil and gas sector dating back
to 2005 when the first
system-wide tank
regulations were
enacted. Since
adoption of that first
set of regulatory
requirements, Colorado
has engaged in a series
of rulemakings to
reduce emissions from
the oil and gas sector.
With rulemakings in 2006, 2008, 2014, 2016 and 2017, Colorado has adopted
increasingly more stringent requirements on the oil and gas sector aimed at a
wide range of sources including: oil storage tanks, glycol dehydrators,
engines, gas-driven pneumatic devices, component leaks, and wellunloadings. In 2014, Colorado became the first state in the nation to directly
regulate methane from oil and gas operations. During that same 2014
rulemaking, Colorado developed a new leak detection and repair program
using optical gas imaging technology, which has since formed the basis for
federal LDAR requirements for the oil and gas industry.
145

In 2019, the Colorado General Assembly passed SB 19-181, which
strengthened the state’s commitment to regulating emissions from the oil and
gas industry by creating a statutory requirement for the AQCC to obtain
emissions data from oil and gas operators and to minimize emissions in the
sector. The AQCC promulgated the first in a planned series of regulations in
December 2019, which included a requirement for annual GHG emissions
reporting from the sector. The AQCC promulgated further regulations in
September 2020 to require monitoring at all new wells and tighten emissions
requirements for pre-production activities. Regulations stemming from
additional AQCC rulemakings are expected to result in lower leak rates and
declining emissions from the sector.
SB 19-181 also changed the mission of the Colorado Oil and Gas
Conservation Commission. The statutory mission, as modified, directs the
COGCC to regulate the development and production of oil and gas in a
manner that protects public health, safety, and welfare, including protection
of the environment and wildlife resources. The legislation also directed
COGCC to update specific rule topics. On November 23, 2020, the COGCC
completed a series of comprehensive rule changes to implement the agency’s
change in mission, address and evaluate cumulative emissions, including air
emissions, and updated numerous rule provisions. These changes improve
protection for people, wildlife, and the environment, and will also enhance
AQCC and COGCC coordination to pursue emissions reductions moving
forward.

Waste Diversion and Methane from Waste
The state, local governments, and the private sector have taken steps
to reduce greenhouse emissions associated with waste generation in
Colorado. Waste diversion can save energy and emissions and composting can
reduce the formation and release of methane in landfills. Organic waste,
including food waste and yard waste, is the largest contributor to landfills in
Colorado and also produces methane when it decomposes in the landfills. As
146

the largest waste stream and a key contributor to GHG emissions, CDPHE has
put an emphasis on reducing organic waste and finding beneficial methods to
utilize these discarded materials.
While Colorado’s municipal solid waste and industrial waste diversion
rates remain lower than other states at 15.9% and 50.0% respectively,
Colorado’s waste diversion industry continues to reduce greenhouse gases. In
2019, recycling and composting in Colorado reduced greenhouse gas emissions
by 1.92 million metric tons of CO2e, which is equivalent to removing 407,000
cars from the road for a year in Colorado or the energy use and emissions
savings equivalent to 148,000 homes being removed from the grid for the year
or conserving 2.34 million barrels of oil or 113 million gallons of gasoline.
Because Colorado’s recycling and waste diversion rates have been below the
average of other states, recycling and waste diversion provide critical
opportunities to reduce emissions.
In July 2020, the legislature adopted a key piece of legislation to
advance recycling end markets in the state. SB 20-055 will support and grow
recycling programs by addressing the lack of local end markets for recyclable
materials. The bill directs CDPHE to:
● convene stakeholders to help shape the structure and governing
guidance for a possible Recycling Market Development Center in the
state;
● complete a literature review regarding producer responsibility
programs and submit policy recommendations to legislature; and
● administer a statewide education campaign on recycling.
Expanding in-state recycling end markets further reduces GHG
emissions by keeping materials here in Colorado, reducing transportationrelated emissions.

147

Similarly, capture of methane associated with waste management in
wastewater treatment plants, agriculture and other areas can create biogas
that can be captured for use for heat, electricity generation or vehicle fuel.
Twenty Colorado wastewater treatment plants put biogas to beneficial use,
including Metro Wastewater District (electricity generation), South Platte
Water Renewal Partners (injection into Xcel Energy gas pipelines), Grand
Junction (biogas for vehicles), City of Longmont (biogas for vehicles), and
City of Boulder (electricity generation). There is considerable opportunity
remaining in the state to put biogas to beneficial use to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions.

Natural and Working Lands
Colorado’s natural and working lands include forests, grasslands,
agricultural croplands and rangelands, wetlands, riparian areas and urban
greenspaces. Natural and working lands are both sources of GHG pollution,
including emissions from wildfires, agricultural equipment and fertilizer use,
and serve as carbon sinks by holding or sequestering carbon in plants and
soils. Natural and working lands, and agricultural producers in particular, are
often the first to experience the impacts of climate change. Natural climate
solutions aim to conserve, restore and improve lands and land management
actions to avoid GHG emissions and increase carbon storage. Natural climate
solutions present a unique opportunity to jointly address climate change
mitigation and adaptation, and generate ecosystem benefits, while also
sustaining working farms, forests and ranches. The generation of ecosystem
market and supply-chain opportunities is another increasingly relevant tool to
help accomplish agricultural emissions reductions and adaptations.

148

Vega State Park; Photo credit: Colorado Parks and Wildlife/Dustin Doskocil.

In 2018 Colorado signed on to the U.S. Climate Alliance's Natural and
Working Lands Challenge, committing to managing natural and working lands
to be resilient carbon sinks and to protect the communities, economies and
ecosystems that depend on them.lii In 2020 state staff established an
interagency Natural and Working Lands Task Force to address Colorado’s
commitment to improving inventory methods for land-based carbon flux;
identify opportunities to reduce GHG pollution and increase resilient carbon
sequestration; and advance programs, policies, and incentives to promote
natural climate solutions. In partnership with The Nature Conservancy, state
staff from the Colorado Department of Natural Resources, Colorado
Department of Agriculture, and Governor’s Office, are currently conducting a
technical analysis to quantify the potential for specific strategies to
contribute to the state’s GHG reduction goals by 2050. This effort will be
completed in 2021 and will identify priority pathways for land management
149

and inform strategic development of NWL policies, programs, and research
agendas. This work complements ongoing and completed work by individual
state agencies and partners.
In 2020 the Colorado State Forest Service published the Colorado
Forest Action Plan, which is a strategic framework to address the conditions
and trends in Colorado’s forestsliii. The Plan identifies priority natural climate
solutions, including reducing the conversion of forests to other land cover
types, particularly in the wildland-urban interface; improving forest
management and productivity through climate-adaptive silviculture;
sequestering carbon in sustainable wood products; enhancing equitable urban
canopy cover; reducing the risk of uncharacteristic wildfires; and promoting
the natural role of fire in ecological processes. The Forest Action Plan will be
integrated into ongoing research, policy development and strategic planning
for natural and working lands in Colorado.
Since 2015, Colorado Energy Office’s Agricultural Energy Efficiency
program has provided dedicated technical resources and services to
agricultural producers across the state to identify and realize energy
efficiency and renewable energy opportunities in their operations. These nocost, turn-key services include preliminary renewable energy assessments and
Type-II energy audits, evaluating energy efficiency opportunities, project cost
estimates, payback periods, and a variety of funding mechanisms available to
provide significant project cost coverage. The AgEE program also offers
support services to help producers successfully complete the funding
application process for each funding source. This soup-to-nuts approach
removes the guesswork and many of the risks of deploying energy efficiency &
renewable energy projects in agricultural operations. The AgEE program
provides the necessary information, materials, and technical support, and
simplifies the process for producers to capitalize on a variety of project cost
coverage options, such as CDA’s ACRE3 grants.

150

The ACRE3 program has been providing grant funding and technical
assistance since 2007 to help Colorado agricultural producers reduce or offset
their on-farm energy costs by installing high efficiency or renewable energy
equipment within their operations. ACRE3 program services include detailed
feasibility studies, engineering assistance, and technical support for project
construction and commissioning. The program collaborates extensively with
the CEO and the USDA-NRCS in providing these services to agricultural
producers throughout the state. In addition to partnering with the CEO on the
AgEE program, the ACRE3 program also provides services through a second
initiative, the Irrigation Hydropower Partnership.
Through the AgEE program, ACRE3 provides funding and additional
technical services for qualifying energy efficiency projects recommended
through CEO’s Type-II energy audit reports, along with technical services and
project funding for solar electric, solar thermal, and geo-exchange projects.
These projects significantly reduce the burden of energy costs for energyintensive agricultural operations, such as dairies. The Irrigation Hydropower
Partnership is an innovative initiative and partnership with the USDA-NRCS to
modernize on-farm irrigation infrastructure, incorporating energy-recovery
hydropower. The hydropower initiative prioritizes water-use efficiency
improvements and water quality improvements in each of its projects. The
hydropower initiative also allows farmers to install center pivot irrigation
systems in remote, off-grid applications when the right combination of
resources is available.
The ACRE3 program is also evaluating criteria to develop a new
agrivoltaics initiative. These large-scale solar projects are designed to allow
continued agricultural production underneath and around the solar arrays.
Among the new criteria, CDA is reviewing strategies to promote social equity
in agrivoltaics by incentivizing community solar gardens with allocations for
lower-income subscribers.

151

While a meaningful proportion of Colorado’s landscape is under various
levels of local, state and federal protection, and more opportunities exist for
public land conservation to address population and climate stressors,
privately-owned natural and working lands present a significant conservation
opportunity for services such as carbon storage, water quality, soil health,
wildlife habitat protection, and safeguarding of local farming and ranching
economies. Voluntary, private land protections such as conservation
easements may help achieve regional climate and land use goals by
preventing mass releases of GHGs through development activities. Research
conducted as part of the Greener Fields project indicates that cutting
farmland loss in California by 75 percent by 2050, or by 700,000 acres, would
reduce GHG emissions the equivalent of taking 1.9 million cars off the road
each year.liv Colorado’s Conservation Easement and Great Outdoors Colorado
programs offer financial and tax incentives for restricting development on
private lands. In 2017, Colorado State University and the Colorado Natural
Heritage Program reported that there are more than 2.5 million private acres
protected under conservation easement.

152

Water Planning
The Colorado Water Plan is the state’s framework for identifying
solutions to water challenges. After completing the 2015 Water Plan, the
Colorado Water Conservation Board began implementing actions and updating
the underlying technical data that ultimately supports the next Water Plan
(anticipated for completion in 2022). In 2019, the state released the Analysis
and Technical Update to the Water Plan — a state of the art study of water
supply and needs through 2050. As the first statewide supply analysis
completed within the context of the Water Plan, the Technical Update
estimates future supply gaps under five planning scenarios that incorporate
the effects of climate change, population growth, and variable economic
futures and societal values. The Technical Update generated a rich dataset
that produced insights to statewide and regional impacts to agriculture,
municipalities and the environment. The results support regional stakeholder
groups in each of Colorado’s eight major river basins and others to plan for
near- and long-term adaptation actions. Recognizing that climate impacts
deeply affect hydrology, water use, water quality, and related disasters such
as flood, drought, and wildfire, the 2022 Water Plan update will continue to
elevate climate science to the forefront of the state water planning.

Just Transition
Coal has played an important role in Colorado's economy, but with
price declines among market competitors, technological advances, and
environmental and public health imperatives, the move away from coal
toward cleaner energy resources is already taking place and will only
accelerate. While the transition to cleaner, lower-cost resources brings
economic benefits to the state, the transition away from coal carries
significant implications for Coloradans who work in the coal industry and the
communities supported by the mines and power plants and those who work in
them. As the state embraces the renewable-energy future, Colorado must
153

remain committed to partnering with and supporting these workers and
communities. They powered Colorado's growth in the past and they should
continue to share in its future prosperity.

The JTAC— composed of a diverse set of representatives ranging from
impacted workers and communities, disproportionately impacted
communities, economic development experts, elected officials, electric
utilities, and state officials— is tasked with developing a Just Transition Plan
for the state. In August 2020, the JTAC submitted a Draft Plan. Following
evaluation of the draft plan and an extensive public input process, executive
leadership from the Department of Labor and Employment and the
Department of Local Affairs will submit a final Just Transition Plan to the
Governor and General Assembly by December 31, 2020.

Climate Equity Framework
In addition to helping workers and communities affected by the clean
energy transition, the state is developing a Climate Equity Framework to help
ensure that Colorado’s response to climate change is guided by principles of
racial equity and economic justice. The framework outlines the state’s plan
to identify and meaningfully engage with communities who are
disproportionately impacted by climate change, including people of color,
Tribes, indigenous persons, lower-income people, historically
154

underrepresented groups, like rural and linguistically isolated communities,
and those experiencing multiple environmental burdens. The framework lays
out data mapping strategies to identify disproportionately impacted
communities and provides best practices for equitable and authentic
community engagement. It also outlines key opportunities for evaluating
potential impacts of policies on disproportionately impacted communities,
striving to reduce burdens and maximize benefits.
Informed by an advisory committee made up of equity, environmental
justice, and community engagement experts and focus groups with members
of disproportionately impacted communities, the Climate Equity Framework
will inform long-term state outreach programs and shape how the state, with
community input, develops and implements specific greenhouse gas reduction
policies, rules, and regulations. The success of the framework depends, in
part, on strong partnerships with community leaders and organizations across
the state. The state recognizes that these important steps to help rebuild a
more just and inclusive system will take time. This change requires a lasting
commitment to constantly reexamine policies and processes, connect with
and listen to community input and ideas, and elevate voices that have been
underrepresented for far too long.

Greening Government
In December 2019, Governor Polis signed an executive order (Executive
Order D 2019 016) focused on the state’s commitment to reducing greenhouse
gas pollution and making government operations more energy efficient and
sustainable. This executive order builds on the state’s prior greening
government efforts and establishes new goals and directives for all State
agencies and departments that will save taxpayer money and reduce the
impact of state operations on the environment and public health. The
executive order’s goals center on reducing greenhouse gas emissions across
state government by at least ten percent below 2014-15 levels by 2022-23.
The executive order also highlights directives in several areas including utility
155

and fleet fuels management; energy efficiency and renewable energy; state
fleet vehicle fuel efficiency and zero emission fleet vehicles; agency and
department staffing and training directives; and leased facilities. To
accomplish these goals, it establishes more targeted efforts in energy
efficiency and energy conservation, increased telecommuting, renewable
energy, and fleet management, including:
● Reducing energy consumption per square foot by 15 percent by the end
of FY 2022-2023
● Increasing the percentage of renewable electricity consumed or
purchased by state facilities to five percent by the end of FY 2022-2023
● Reducing greenhouse gas emissions from state fleet vehicles by 15
percent by the end of FY 2022-2023

Local Government Activities
In addition to state actions, numerous local governments throughout
Colorado are implementing strategies to address climate change and its
adverse impacts in their communities or are initiating planning to address the
climate crisis. These communities range from the largest metropolitan
centers to small mountain counties and represent the diverse economic and
geographic aspects of Colorado. While the individual programs vary in size
and scope, collectively they form a foundation that can be built on through
continued collaboration and dedication to a common goal.
The City of Fort Collins Climate Action Plan tracks annual GHG
emissions using 2005 as its baseline year. The community aims to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions by 20% below 2005 levels by 2020 and 80% by 2030
with the goal of being carbon neutral by 2050. As of 2018, the community had
reduced emissions 14%.
In 2018 Boulder County completed a Greenhouse Gas Inventory and
Emissions Reductions Strategies Report with an updated inventory and new
long-term emission reduction goals to reduce community GHG emissions 45%
below 2005 levels by 2030 and 90% below 2005 levels by 2050. On January 1,
156

2020, the County began collecting a voter approved 0.125% sales tax, which
will generate approximately $7.5 million per year for sustainability programs.
The City of Boulder set a 100% renewable energy goal by 2030, and 100
megawatts of renewable energy generation by the same year. They have also
set the target of reaching 80% community greenhouse gas emission reduction
by 2050, and have a climate action plan tax on electricity consumption that
funds climate programs.
The City and County of Denver adopted the 80X50 Climate Action Plan
with a goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 45% by 2030 and 80% by
2050 through the decarbonization of transportation, buildings, and the
electricity grid. To reach those goals, the plan calls for reducing total
community-wide greenhouse gas emissions 30 percent by 2025, making all
new buildings net-zero by 2035 and achieving 100 percent renewable
electricity in municipal facilities by 2025 and community-wide by 2030. In
November, 2020 Denver voters approved measure 2A, which increases the
Denver sales tax rate by 0.25% and is projected to generate approximately
$36 million annually to invest in implementing the city climate plan.
Summit County has a plan to reduce community wide emissions 50% by
2030 and 80% by 2050. Many cities and counties throughout the state
including Carbondale, Adams County, and Gunnison County have adopted
similar plans with substantive goals on energy efficiency and renewable
energy, sustainability measures, multi-modal transportation programs, energy
efficient building codes, and waste reduction.
A $12 million Renewable and Clean Energy Challenge was launched in
2019 by the Department of Local Affairs to help spark efforts to reach
Colorado’s 2040 100% renewable energy goal. That challenge resulted in
$1,175,456 in renewable planning projects and another $4,416,704 in
renewable implementation awards across Colorado. Funds that remain from
the Challenge are specifically earmarked for ongoing renewable and clean
157

energy projects. Projects must include renewable energy, energy efficiency,
and energy conservation efforts, support innovations in renewable energy,
achieve multiple objectives and/or serve those with the greatest need,
develop plans, studies, and policies that further long-term, large-scale
renewable energy generation and energy conservation. The governor’s
supplemental stimulus request to the legislature for the 2021 session would
add $5 million to this fund.

Federal Government Activities
The November 2020 election significantly changes climate leadership
at the federal level. While the composition of the United States Senate is still
unclear at the time of this writing, the incoming Biden Administration has
elevated climate action, environmental justice, and clean energy
infrastructure investment as top priorities to build a more resilient and
sustainable economy, and put the United States on a path to achieve net-zero
emissions no later than 2050.
Colorado and a growing coalition of other states have taken significant
steps over the past four years to reduce GHGs and other pollution while
swiftly transitioning to renewable energy, despite not only lack of leadership
at the federal level but in many cases active obstruction and rollback of
critical environmental protections. While Colorado is not relying on or
assuming specific federal activity to reach its state-based renewable energy
and emissions reduction goals, the state welcomes partnership with the
federal government to advance and broaden state momentum on climate
action and re-engage the United States as a global leader on this critical
issue. While not exhaustive, below are a few examples of opportunities to
further partner with the federal government in the coming years:
Federal Stimulus Investment
Top of mind for all Coloradans is COVID-19’s dire impact on our health
and safety, our well-being, our economy and our economic security. Colorado
158

urges the federal government to prioritize immediate relief and public health
protection measures. Looking toward future fiscal stimulus, the incoming
Administration shares Colorado’s perspective that fueling a strong economic
recovery provides a significant opportunity to invest in clean energy
infrastructure, innovation, and technology. This will ensure a more resilient,
equitable and sustainable economy as the state progresses toward sciencebased emission reduction targets. In May 2020, Governor Polis issued a letter
to the Colorado Congressional Delegation in which he outlined a number of
opportunities for federal funding to support robust, long-term recovery
through investments in key areas. Immediate areas for funding include
transportation infrastructure, clean transportation technology, broadband,
water infrastructure, energy efficiency, renewable energy, and lower-income
weatherization. We will continue to engage the federal government to secure
critical resources for Colorado.

Transportation Policy
The transportation sector is the top emitter of greenhouse gases both
nationally and in Colorado, and is also a significant contributor to local air
pollution that disproportionately impacts lower-wealth communities and
communities of color. Regulations requiring improvements in vehicle
efficiency or ZEV adoption are largely controlled at the federal level or
through California’s vehicle standards under Section 177 of the Federal Clean
Air Act. While Colorado has already adopted both Low Emission Vehicle and
Zero Emission Vehicle standards that increase each year through 2025 through
California’s waiver, the Trump administration engaged in a rulemaking (SAFE
1) to revoke California’s waiver, as well as a rulemaking (SAFE 2) to roll back
federal standards. Colorado is one of many states engaged in litigation to
overturn the waiver revocation and restore state authority. President-elect
Biden has committed to strengthening federal standards, and is expected to
restore the California waiver in 2021. In addition, the Biden administration is
likely to propose new car and new clean truck standards. As described in the
159

section on near term actions (page 58), the state intends to actively engage
to provide input on the development of both the federal and California
standards, and evaluate which standards are appropriate for Colorado.

HFC Transition
Phasing out HFCs is an important step toward meeting climate
objectives. HFCs have a very high global warming potential and their use is
projected to grow substantially without action to phase them out in products
such as foams, refrigerants and aerosols. The state has led in this area
through the AQCC’s passage of HFC phase-out rules in May 2020. Further
opportunities for phase out and capture of HFCs exist in the residential sector
and in the maintenance and replacement of products using these substances.
The state supports further efforts at the national level to achieve HFC phaseout and will evaluate opportunities to address remaining gaps.

Natural and Working Lands
The NRCS has partnered with CDA to financially support (75% match) up
to six soil health and urban agricultural specialists over the next five years.
NRCS also operates the Agricultural Conservation Easement Program, which
partners with local land trusts and local governments to protect wetlands,
grasslands and working farms and ranches.
President-elect Biden has indicated support for limiting greenhouse gas
emissions both domestically and internationally from land use change,
forests, and agriculture, as well as strengthening land conservation efforts.
The Colorado Department of Natural Resources and Department of Agriculture
will pursue federal partnerships on natural and working lands through federal
funding opportunities such as the Regional Conservation Partnership Program
(RCPP), Emergency Watershed Protection (EWP), and State and Private
Forestry funding. In seeking to form the Agricultural Climate Resilience
Office, CDA would create a structure to facilitate new opportunities and
partnerships. President-elect Biden supports investing in agricultural
160

conservation programs for cover crops and other climate-smart practices, so
there may be further opportunities for CDA to expand their programming with
support from federal partners in the coming years.

161

ENDNOTES
1. The implementing rules may take into account other relevant laws and rules, as well as
voluntary actions taken by local communities and the private sector, to enhance
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, and shall be revised as necessary over time to ensure
timely progress toward the 2025, 2030, and 2050 goals.”
2. The Roadmap discusses emissions reduction in agriculture in the broader context of
natural and working lands.
3. This resolution is available from the CDPHE website.
4. Technical appendices available on the Roadmap webpage describe the methodology that
the state agencies used to model the emissions reductions associated with these actions.
5. https://www3.drcog.org/documents/archive/2004_FasTracks_Plan.pdf
6. Emissions reduction from the use of biogas in the residential, commercial, and industrial
sector is included here and not reflected in the reductions in the Waste sector.
7. State staff set a minimum goal of sequestering 1MMT CO2e through agricultural soil
health practices by 2030. Land use, land use change and forestry are not included in this
analysis and current data is insufficient to inform broader emissions reduction goals
across all natural and working lands. This number will be revised pending ongoing
inventory improvements detailed in the Recommended Near Term Action Plan.
8. The emissions reductions associated with biogas use are shown in the residential.
commercial, industrial category.
9. Fuel use from the industrial sector is included in the residential, commercial fuel use
category.
10. In most cases, it is the utility, not the state, that initiates actions at the PUC.
11. Other major greenhouse gases include: Nitrous Oxide (N2O) and fluorinated gases such as
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride, and nitrogen trifluoride.
12. Source: https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide/
13. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration State Climate Series. Accessed at
https://statesummaries.ncics.org/chapter/co/
14. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration State Climate Series. Accessed at
https://statesummaries.ncics.org/chapter/co/
15. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration State Climate Series. Accessed at
https://statesummaries.ncics.org/chapter/co/
16. Colorado Climate Plan: State Level Policies and Strategies to Mitigate and Adapt. State of
Colorado, 2015. Page 49.
17. https://statesummaries.ncics.org/chapter/co/
18. The Economic Contribution of Agriculture to Colorado’s Economy. Colorado Department
of Agriculture.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ZJm_G8ng_1csUQvZw_iiMsn6DYSDjm_X/view
19. Colorado Climate Plan: State Level Policies and Strategies to Mitigate and Adopt. State of
Colorado, 2015. Page 49.
20. Colorado Climate Plan: State Level Policies and Strategies to Mitigate and Adopt. State of
Colorado, 2015. Page 49
21. The 2017 Economic Contributions of Outdoor Recreation in Colorado. Southwick and
Associates. July 23, 2018.
22. U.S. EPA, 2019, Section 12.5.4.
23. USGCRP, 2018: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National
Climate Assessment, Volume II [Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E.
Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change
Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 1515 pp. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018
24. House Bill 2019-1261. https://leg.colorado.gov/bills/hb19-1261

162

25. Senate Bill 19-96, https://leg.colorado.gov/bills/sb19-096
26. Heald, Sarah. Colorado 2015 Greenhouse Gas Inventory Update Including Projections to
2020 & 2030. State of Colorado, December 2019.
27. The modeling inputs and assumptions developed by E3 are available to download from
the Roadmap webpage. The state modeling assumptions and data is available from the
Roadmap webpage and the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
website.
28. Emissions reduction from the use of biogas in the residential, commercial, and industrial
sector is included here and not reflected in the reductions in the Waste sector.
29. State staff set a minimum goal of sequestering 1MMT CO2e through agricultural soil
health practices by 2030. Land use, land use change and forestry are not included in this
analysis and current data is insufficient to inform broader emissions reduction goals
across all natural and working lands. This number will be revised pending ongoing
inventory improvements detailed in the Recommended Near Term Action Plan on page
33.
30. The emissions reductions associated with biogas use are shown in the residential.
commercial, industrial category.
31. Fuel use from the industrial sector is included in the residential, commercial fuel use
category.
32. Source: https://www.trucking.org/economics-and-industry-data
33. https://usa.streetsblog.org/2019/02/08/minneapolis-and-seattle-have-achieved-theholy-grail-for-sustainable-transportation/
34. The study is available from the Colorado Energy Office website,
https://drive.google.com/file/d/11zczj8ieUzNbxMvlob9HJCctyzJGVYF3/view
35. See Decision No. C20-0770, Proceeding No. 20M-0439G
36. RNG in Transportation: Colorado Market Study, June 2019, available at
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1oewEgxtchUJS60djChqQF8jsJxRETnNJ/view
37. https://www.colorado.gov/cowaterplan
38. https://www.coresiliency.com/
39. https://cpw.state.co.us/aboutus/Pages/StateWildlifeActionPlan.aspx
40. https://cwcb.colorado.gov/drought
41. https://csfs.colostate.edu/forest-action-plan/
42. Note: Washington SB 5981 and Oregon SB 1530 would have directed economy-wide capand-trade programs for those states. Costs are based on administrative costs and not the
value of proceeds of actions, etc.
43. This number only includes CARB staff assigned to programs implementing California
Assembly Bill 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, and CA Health & Safety Code
section 38566 (setting GHG reduction targets), and sections 39710-39723 (the Greenhouse
Gas Reduction Fund). CARB has, along with other California agencies, hundreds of
additional staff working on other aspects of climate change
44. GHG emissions in 2015 were estimated in the EPA’s State Inventory Tool that uses
national, regional, and state energy and activity data to calculate a greenhouse gas
emissions inventory in a given year. This was supplemented with a detailed analysis of oil
and gas fugitive emissions from the Colorado Air Pollution Control Division of the
Department of Public Health and Environment.
45. Colorado Climate Action Plan: A Strategy to Address Global Warming, Governor Bill
Ritter, Jr., November 2007.
46. Section 40-2-124(1)(c)(I)(E), C.R.S.
47. Decision No. C10-1328, Proceeding No. 10M-245E
48. https://www.chieftain.com/news/20200807/evraz-on-solid-ground-in-pueblo-with-newrail-mill-project.
49. Source Tri-State filings PUC proceeding 20M-0218E.
50. Examples of measures include attic insulation, air infiltration sealing, high efficiency
appliances, LED light bulbs, and rooftop solar photovoltaic systems; measure installation

163

is based on energy modeling and cost effectiveness. These installed measures produce a
typical combined reduction of 20% in electricity and heating fuel bills for WAP homes.
51. Data taken from Colorado Electric Utility Energy Efficiency Programs: A Success Story.
Southwest Energy Efficiency Project, 2019.
https://www.swenergy.org/Data/Sites/1/media/aaa-documents-2019/fact-sheets/codsm-fact-sheet-2019.pdf
52. http://www.usclimatealliance.org/nwlchallenge
53. Colorado Forest Action Plan. Colorado State Forest Service, 2020.
54. https://www.google.com/url?q=https://farmlandinfo.org/publications/greener-fieldscalifornia-communities-combating-climatechange/&sa=D&ust=1608062215896000&usg=AOvVaw0VLHH75GFZfY8BiTKqTcnp

x

In most cases, it is the utility, not the state, that initiates actions at the PUC.

164

165

