STATE OF LOUISIAN A
G OVERN OR JOH N BE L E DWARD S

LOUISIANA
CLIMATE ACTION PLAN
C L I M ATE IN ITIATIV ES TASK F O RCE
R E CO MMEN DATIO N S TO THE GOV ERNOR
February 2022

CLIM AT E I NI T IAT IV E S TAS K FO RCE

GOV.LOUISIANA. GOV / PAG E/ C L I M ATE- I N I TI ATI VE S-TASK- F O R C E

Submitted February 1, 2022

STATE OF LOUISIAN A
G OVERN OR JOH N BE L E DWARD S

Dear Governor Edwards,
I am proud to submit for your consideration the report of the Climate Initiatives Task Force,
entitled the Louisiana Climate Action Plan. As directed in Executive Order JBE 2020-18, the
Climate Action Plan offers a balanced suite of recommendations that can lead Louisiana to
achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 and thereby do our part to avoid the worst
impacts of climate change.
For the first time in Louisiana’s history, state government collaborated with stakeholders and the
public to jointly focus on the long-term, statewide reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. This
Plan embodies a transparent and science-driven process that will continue as the Plan is
implemented and adapted over time. The result of this collaboration is a Climate Action Plan that
boldly recognizes that the status quo is unacceptable. Climate action not only avoids everincreasing hardship for our communities and cultural heritage; it can also create a more
prosperous and equitable society for generations to come.
The state’s Climate Action Plan will complement ongoing efforts to implement the state’s Coastal
Master Plan, which serves as a model around the world for comprehensively adapting to the
impacts of climate change, and other ongoing efforts of the state. In her cover letter submitting
the state’s first Coastal Master Plan to the Louisiana Legislature in 2007, former Governor
Kathleen Blanco said that, “The completion of this plan is an historic step in a journey which
promises safer communities, a more sustainable coastal landscape, and a brighter future for
Louisiana.”
Fifteen years later, with the completion of the Louisiana Climate Action Plan, we now embark on
an equally historic journey to do our part to avoid the worst impacts of climate change.
Implementation of this Climate Action Plan is critical if we are to truly deliver on the promise of
safer communities, a more sustainable coastal landscape, and a brighter future for Louisiana.
Sincerely,

Kyle “Chip” R. Kline, Jr.
Executive Assistant to the Governor for Coastal Activities
Chair of the Climate Initiatives Task Force

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................................... 1
VISION, GOALS, AND OBJECTIVES ........................................................................................................................... 3
PLANNING PROCESS AND METHODOLOGY .............................................................................................................. 5
ACCOUNTING FOR LOUISIANA’S GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS ........................................................................... 11
THE RISKS OF INACTION: WHY CLIMATE ACTION IS CRITICAL FOR LOUISIANA .........................................................15
REALIZING THE BENEFITS OF THIS CLIMATE ACTION PLAN...................................................................................... 32
CLIMATE STRATEGIES AND ACTIONS ................................................................................................................................ 41
Clean Energy Transition.............................................................................................................................. 43
Industrial Decarbonization......................................................................................................................... 52
Actively Manage Methane Emissions ...................................................................................................... 64
Transportation, Development, and the Built Environment ................................................................. 71
Natural Working Lands and Wetlands..................................................................................................... 87
An Inclusive, Low-Carbon Economy ......................................................................................................... 96
Collaboration and Partnershio to Ensure Successful Implementation .........................................103
Accountability and Adaptability to Ensure Lasting Success.............................................................108
NEXT STEPS AND ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT OF LOUISIANA’S FIRST CLIMATE ACTION PLAN ...................................116
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX ..................................................................................................................................118
ACRONYMS ........................................................................................................................................................128
GLOSSARY..........................................................................................................................................................130
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .......................................................................................................................................137
APPENDIX A. DISSENT.........................................................................................................................................143
APPENDIX B. MEETING LIST.................................................................................................................................149
APPENDIX C. SUMMARY OF SUBMITTED ACTION PROPOSALS ..............................................................................151
APPENDIX D. EXECUTIVE ORDER .........................................................................................................................159
APPENDIX E. TASK FORCE VOTES ........................................................................................................................164
REFERENCES ......................................................................................................................................................166

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Introduction
The risks posed by climate change to the people of Louisiana are high. The evidence reveals
that these impacts have been worsening and will continue to increase in the future.
Addressing the root cause of climate change, however, presents an opportunity for
Louisiana to build on existing strengths and to maintain competitiveness in various sectors
such as energy, manufacturing, and maritime transportation in the midst of a global energy
transition. Taking action to address climate change is also an opportunity to improve the
health, equity, and quality of life of Louisiana residents, conserve the environment and
cultural heritage, and grow and diversify the economy, while offering safe, meaningful
employment for Louisiana’s workforce.
In August 2020, Governor John Bel Edwards signed an Executive Order that created the Climate
Initiatives Task Force to develop strategies and actions to address the causes of climate change and
seize the opportunities presented by the energy transition. Like many other states around the nation, and
nearly one fifth of the world’s 2,000 largest companies, the Governor’s Executive Order committed Louisiana
to achieving net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050. The order also established immediate goals
and interim goals in accordance with the Paris Climate Agreement.
The work of the Climate Initiatives Task Force has been intensive over the 15 months from the signing of the
Executive Order to the completion of this report. The Task Force is made up of government, private
sector, academic, environmental, and community voices. It is supported by six sector committees focused on
solutions from different aspects of the economy and by four advisory groups including equity, science, law, and
economics. Over 140 experts participated as members of the Task Force, its committees, or its advisory groups
and engaged across nearly 50 public meetings held since November 2020. Throughout this work, the
Governor and the Task Force have prioritized broad engagement from multiple stakeholder voices,
transparency with the public, and a reliance on the best available science and information in order to
arrive at a set of balanced actions to address this complex and enormous challenge.
The plan recommends strategies (high-level approaches) and actions (practical and implementable policy
steps) to reduce GHG emissions to net zero by 2050 and avert the worst impacts of climate change while
making our current adaptation efforts more successful and reducing risks for future generations. The plan
also offers strategies and actions that can improve health outcomes and the quality of life of Louisiana residents
immediately by reducing the amount of fossil fuel combustion in the production of electricity and manufactured
goods and from buildings and transportation while helping to slow the warming of the atmosphere that causes
other climate impacts harming health, safety, and quality of life. The Task Force also developed objectives
around creating a more equitable society. By prioritizing equity in the design of policies, this plan seeks to ensure
that the costs of mitigation or adaptation actions do not fall unequally on people currently and historically
disadvantaged in Louisiana. This plan is an opportunity to implement climate mitigation and adaptation
measures which also address long-standing inequities while promoting new opportunities for a more inclusive,
low-carbon economy in the future.
Louisiana’s economy and workforce can also benefit from many of the actions and strategies in this plan. New
investments in renewable power and distributed energy, re-investment in facilities and infrastructure to adapt

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

1

existing industries for success in the low-carbon economy, cleaning up orphaned wells and methane leaks, and
other activities that expand access to economic opportunity more broadly are all supported by this plan. In
addition, the state can maintain or increase its ability to naturally sequester carbon dioxide (CO2) while promoting
resilience for communities and ecosystems by implementing this plan. Other benefits, like more sustainable
soils, better water quality, and natural protection for communities and major economic engines, are also possible
with action to address climate change. Louisiana is already a leader in coastal adaptation and is creating new
systems to address flooding statewide. As implementers adopt measures in this Climate Action Plan to reduce
GHG emissions, they can also support community adaptation measures and extensive co-benefits. Distributed
solar with storage, energy efficiency improvements, and land use planning can all support emissions reductions
and bolster adaptation as well.
While an understanding of the issues and opportunities facing Louisiana related to the impacts of climate
change is critically important, it is all the more important to begin taking action to address the root cause
of climate change. The Task Force’s adopted set of strategies and actions herein identifies needed steps across
every sector of the economy for reducing GHG emissions and forging a better future for all Louisianans.
The plan provides numerous actions and strategies which are interdependent and interconnected. Net zero is
attainable through this set of strategies and actions, but whether Louisiana achieves net zero by 2050, on the
other hand, depends on full-scale and timely implementation, as well as support from the federal government.
In addition, achieving co-benefits and successful implementation will depend not just on what is done, but how
action is taken. This plan charts a path for climate action in Louisiana in ways that effectively reduce GHG
emissions and meet the target of net zero by 2050, while also improving equity, public health and quality of
life, preserves and protects the environment, builds confidence and awareness among the public, and makes
us more resilient and adaptable to changing environmental conditions.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

2

Vision, Goals, and Objectives
Governor Edwards charged the Task Force with developing actionable recommendations to achieve the following
Vision and GHG Emissions Reduction Goals. The Task Force, committees, and advisory groups established a
set of objectives to further guide their planning and evaluation of strategies and actions.

V IS ION

Reduce GHG emissions to limit the impacts of climate change that harm the
state’s natural and cultural heritage while adapting to maintain Louisiana’s
position as a world leader in energy, industry, agriculture, and transportation.
Executive Order JBE 2020-18

GHG EMISSIONS REDUCT ION GOALS
The GHG emissions reduction goals (Figure 1) are derived in part from the declaration by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that “global net human-caused emissions of carbon dioxide [CO2]...would need
to fall by about 45 percent from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching ‘net zero’ around 2050.”1 These goals also align
with the U.S.' Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) which represent its commitment in the Paris
Climate Agreement to limit global warming to 1.5°C,2 and are calibrated to 2005 to correspond to
Louisiana‘s 2010 Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHG Inventory). Additionally, Governor Edwards’ goals put
Louisiana in line with commitments made by dozens of other states as well as businesses operating in
multiple sectors internationally, nationally, and within Louisiana. These businesses span a variety of industrial
sectors including energy producers, public utilities, chemical manufacturers, technology firms, and finance.

FIGURE 1. LOUISIANA’S GHG EMISSIONS REDUCTION GOALS.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

3

OBJECTIVES
Fundamental objectives are the essential goals of this effort and served to guide the development and evaluation
of climate mitigation actions and strategies considered in this plan. The fundamental objectives represent
strongly held values that helped to identify co-benefits and potential negative consequences of action. The
seventeen fundamental objectives of this plan are grouped in Table 1 by theme.
TABLE 1. FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVES USED TO GUIDE DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION OF ACTIONS AND
STRATEGIES WITHIN THE CLIMATE ACTION PLAN.

Reducing Net
Greenhouse Gas
(GHG) Emissions

• Minimize net GHG emissions.

Improving Health
• Maximize quality of and access to essential goods, services, and infrastructure for residents.
and Quality of Life • Maximize positive public health outcomes and public safety.
for Residents and • Maximize the preservation of cultural heritage.
Communities
Creating a More
Equitable Society
Strengthening
the Economy and
Workforce
Conserving
Natural
Resources

• Reduce socioeconomic, demographic, and geographic disparities in future opportunities and outcomes.
• Maximize reduction and mitigation of historical and structural inequities and their impacts for
underserved and marginalized communities, including communities of color and Indigenous peoples.
• Maximize engagement with and participation of communities in decision-making and implementation.

• Maximize employment, economic opportunity, and support for Louisiana workers.
• Maximize economic growth.

• Maximize preservation of natural resources and ecosystem services.
• Maximize environmental stewardship and support of healthy ecosystems.

• Increase resilience of the built and natural environment to climate change.
Adapting to a
Changing Climate • Increase the resilience of communities to climate change.

Managing for
Short- and LongTerm Success

• Maximize confidence of the public and stakeholders in the outcome of emissions-reduction strategies
to increase support for their implementation.
• Maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of emissions-reduction strategies.
• Maximize timely implementation of emissions-reduction strategies.
• Maximize the durability of emissions-reduction strategies in an uncertain future.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

4

Planning Process and Methodology
Governor Edwards called on the Task Force to produce a Climate Action Plan that outlines actions to reduce
net GHG emissions from all sectors of the economy and to set Louisiana on a path to meet its short-, medium-,
and long-term emission reduction goals. Actions and strategies reduce GHG emissions while achieving other
co-benefits for Louisiana's communities, environment, and economy. Achieving this vision and the
state’s emission reduction goals in a manner that is inclusive and balanced requires a deliberate and
transparent planning process.

ST RUCTURE
The Task Force, its sector committees, and advisory groups comprise over 140 experts and stakeholders from
state government, colleges and universities, the private sector, and civil society that advised and contributed
to the strategies and actions contained in this Climate Action Plan (Figure 2). See full membership at the end
of this report.
Membership across these bodies is reflective of the Governor’s vision to achieve balance through their broadbased composition with representatives from corporate entities, advocacy organizations, regulators, academics,
and community representatives. Bringing together a variety of stakeholders with varying interests and values
allowed for robust and challenging discussions that ensured an end result of comprehensive actions that set
Louisiana on a path to net zero GHG emissions by 2050.

This twenty-three-member body set priorities for the
overall planning process, weighed trade-offs among
different approaches, and ultimately approved a set
of recommendations for the Climate Action Plan.

Members developed and evaluated
implementable emission reduction
strategies and actions that aim to
significantly
reduce
net
GHG
emissions across all aspects of their
respective sector.

Members evaluated the anticipated impacts of
strategies and actions to Louisiana’s people,
economy, and environment and advised the
planning process from the perspective of equitable
impacts, sound science, financial feasibility, and
economic implications.
FIGURE 2. THE PLANNING PROCESS STRUCTURE USED TO DEVELOP LOUISIANA’S CLIMATE ACTION PLAN.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

5

The Task Force is chaired and staffed by the Office of the Governor, Coastal Activities (GOCA). Under leadership
of the Governor’s Executive Assistant for Coastal Activities, GOCA serves as the staff and managers of the Task
Force, advisory groups, and sector committees in coordination with advisory and committee chairs. As staff of
this effort, GOCA also works alongside all members, state agencies, outside stakeholders, and the public to
increase engagement in the process, expand partnerships, and coordinate among all entities. As
Louisiana’s Innovation and Collaboration Hub, the Water Institute of the Gulf (the Water Institute) assisted
GOCA as it led the planning process for and development of the Climate Action Plan. This Planning Team,
comprised of GOCA and the Water Institute, ensured the Task Force remained on track to complete the
deliverables within the timelines.

ST RUCTURED DECIS I ON MAK ING
The planning process for developing this Climate Action Plan was grounded in a Structured Decision
Making approach (Figure 3). In basic terms, this six-step framework is “a formalization of common
sense for decision problems which are too complex for informal use of common sense”. 3 , 4
This approach combined science and policy to break down complex decisions and identify
solutions that meet the goals and objectives of the Task Force in a manner that is explicit and
transparent.

FIGURE 3. THE SIX-STEP STRUCTURED DECISION MAKING PROCESS.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

6

PLANNING TIMELINE
This plan was developed, evaluated, and refined over an intensive 16-month collaborative process that included
49 public meetings of the Task Force, sector committees, and advisory groups as well as opportunities for the
public to share their ideas for climate actions and provide feedback on the draft plan components. The following
timeline includes the phases of this planning process, tagged to their corresponding Structured Decision Making
step.
EXECUTIVE ORDER ESTABLISHES TASK FORCE: August 2020
Governor Edwards signed Executive Order JBE 2020-18, establishing a 23-member
Task Force, supported by six sector committees and four advisory groups, and calling for
an updated GHG Inventory, an interim report in February of 2021, and a final climate
strategy by February of 2022.
Referencing the value of Louisiana’s coast and the projections for an additional 2,250 to
4,120 square miles of coastal land loss over the next fifty years, Executive Order JBE 202018 connects Louisiana’s coastal crisis, the catastrophic human costs of natural disasters,
and the international scientific consensus that GHG emissions are causing unprecedented
global warming. “To improve our resilience, sustain our coast, and help avoid the worst
impacts of climate change,” the order states, “Louisiana must proactively work to reduce
the GHG emissions that are driving up global temperatures, raising sea levels, and
increasing risks that threaten our health and safety, quality of life, economic growth, and
vital habitats and ecosystems.” Governor Edwards also clearly articulated his desire for
solutions to this problem to be developed in partnership with multiple stakeholders with
the ultimate goal of reaching a “balanced” set of strategies that would both help “limit the
impacts of climate change that harm our state’s natural and cultural heritage,” and provide
ways for us to adapt “to maintain [our] position as a world leader in energy, industry,
agriculture, and transportation.”
KICK-OFF AND OBJECTIVE SETTING: November 2020 – February 2021
The Task Force met for the first time in November 2020, kicking off a 15-month planning
process to develop this strategy. The Task Force and each of the sector committees and
advisory groups met in December to discuss and identify objectives important to Louisiana
in how the state approaches reducing its GHG emissions. Objectives included measures of
health and quality of life, equity, economy and jobs, the environment, resilience, and
effectiveness and durability. These fundamental objectives served as the backbone of this
planning process and were directly considered in the development of climate actions and
strategies and in evaluating and refining solutions.
WORKSHOPPING HIGH-LEVEL STRATEGIES: March 2021
Each of the sector committees met in March to begin brainstorming strategies – high-level
paths to reducing GHG emissions within their sector. This focus on bigger picture vision
helped to ensure a comprehensive approach to the development of practical actions.
PUBLIC CALL FOR ACTION PROPOSALS: February – April 2021
Sector committee, advisory group, and Task Force members as well as the public were
invited to submit proposals for actions to be considered in this plan. Actions are based
around a specific and directly implementable policy, program, or project that will result in
a net reduction in GHG emissions and/or comprehensively address a cross-cutting

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

7

implementation priority (climate equity, economic transition, scientific advancement, or
governance). Actions were developed using a common Action Proposal Template that
included a title, description, impact on net GHG emissions, co-benefits, consequences,
timeframe, lead and partners, climate equity priorities, and other implementation and
feasibility considerations.
In addition to individual sector committee and advisory group working sessions, six CrossSector Action Workshops were held in April to improve draft action proposals and identify
new Action proposals through a cross-disciplinary discussion of key technical, tactical, and
implementation issues that cut across sectors. The cross-sector themes included: siting of
new power generation and energy infrastructure; state and local codes, procurement and
contracting policies; advancing research and supporting new technology; carbon pricing;
increasing participation in climate action; and combining climate mitigation goals with
adaptation and resilience goals.
In total, 171 action proposals were received by the April 30, 2021, deadline. All raw action
proposals are publicly available on the Climate Initiatives Task Force website.
ASSESSING ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES: March – June 2021
Two rounds of evaluation were conducted to investigate the impacts of climate action in
Louisiana on the state’s GHG emissions and on the people, economy, and environment. An
initial analysis of potential positive and negative impacts, called the “consequence
analysis,” of high-level hypothetical emission reduction scenarios was undertaken in Spring
2021. This analysis was intended to better understand the magnitude of Louisiana’s
GHG emissions challenge, the maximum benefits or limitations of particular
approaches, and the various impacts on the people, environment, and economy
of Louisiana. This consequence analysis focused on evaluating the impacts of a
“business-as-usual” case (no targeted effort to reduce net GHG emissions for
Louisiana) as well as a set of four hypothetical strategy portfolios (“what-if”
scenarios) designed to evaluate what the outcomes for different types of GHGreduction strategies might be. Scenarios included intensive electrification through zerocarbon renewable energy; reduced energy demand, consumption, and waste intensive;
industrial carbon removal, capture, use, and storage intensive; and natural
sequestration and sinks intensive.
The hypothetical portfolios were evaluated against each of the 17 fundamental
objectives of this planning process. The net-GHG emission reduction potential of each
portfolio was evaluated using a beta version of the Louisiana Energy Policy Simulator
(EPS) modeling tool (developed for Louisiana by Energy Innovation) as well as
through referencing additional research, including national net zero pathway studies.
Impacts to the other 16 fundamental objectives were evaluated using a survey to elicit the
expertise of advisory group members.
Key take-aways from this first consequence analysis included an acknowledgement that
no single strategy or approach is the solution and that aggressive action across multiple
approaches will be necessary to meet Louisiana’s emission reduction targets.
Strategies will also require intentional action to ensure co-benefits and positive
outcomes for all people and across all of the fundamental objectives.
The full results of this consequence analysis are detailed in a Technical Memorandum
developed by the Water Institute, available online.
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

8

DEVELOPING A PORTFOLIO OF DRAFT STRATEGIES & ACTIONS: May – August 2021
Action proposals received through the public call were posted to the Climate Initiatives
website, sorted into sectors and themes, and discussed by the relevant sector committees.
The Planning Team reviewed all proposals and worked to organize, refine, combine, gapfill, and group actions under high-level strategies. A comprehensive Draft Portfolio of
Climate Strategies and Actions was shared with the Task Force, sector committees,
advisory groups, state agencies, and the public in August 2021 for review and feedback.
EVALUATING CONSEQUENCES OF STRATEGIES & ACTIONS: September – October 2021
A second round of consequence analysis considered the likely outcomes and impacts of
the Draft Portfolio of Climate Strategies and Actions. As with the first consequence analysis
in the Spring, the draft portfolio was evaluated against each of the 17 fundamental
objectives of this planning process. The net-GHG emission reduction potential of the
portfolio was evaluated by the Water Institute using a now-public version of the Louisiana
EPS modeling tool. Impacts to the other 16 fundamental objectives were evaluated
using a survey to elicit the expertise of advisory group members. Results of the
consequence analysis were shared and discussed with the Task Force in October 2021.
The full results of this consequence analysis are detailed in a second
Technical Memorandum developed by the Water Institute, available online.
In addition to a second consequence analysis, GOCA also encouraged technical feedback
on strategy and action details from sector committee members, discussed implementation
considerations with state agencies, and received public comments on the draft portfolio
and draft report sections during this phase in the planning process.
GHG INVENTORY UPDATE: October 2021
The LSU Center for Energy Studies (CES) conducted an update to Louisiana’s GHG
Inventory, which was released as a public report in October 2021. This inventory estimates
and assesses the state’s GHG emissions from all major sources, activity types, economic
sectors, and pollutant types and provides an important updated snapshot in time of
Louisiana’s GHG baseline. The report also provides trends in data from 2000-2018. LSU
CES last conducted a statewide GHG inventory in 2010 using 2005 data. This 2021 update
using 2018 data provides valuable insight into the nature of Louisiana’s GHG emissions
profile and how that has changed.
The Science Advisory Group provided oversight and direction to guide the GHG Inventory
update process, including two rounds of comments. A presentation of draft findings was
shared with the Task Force in its July 2021 meeting.
WEIGHING TRADE-OFFS AND REFINING THE PLAN: October 2021 – January 2022
GOCA reviewed all points of feedback and evaluation, considered diverging priorities and
perspectives, carefully weighed trade-offs, sought ways to improve anticipated outcomes,
and clarified implementation details in revising the Draft Portfolio of Climate Strategies and
Actions. The updated portfolio also set specific targets and goals, identified and
strengthened in the portfolio to provide specificity and direction for individual actions.
These goals were established based on their ability to drive down emissions towards
net zero, determined through research and utilization of the Louisiana EPS tool

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

9

and best practices from other states pursuing similar ambitions. This revised draft
portfolio represented a further effort at striking the balance between the needs and
perspectives of different stakeholders, meeting the urgent need to address the root
causes of climate change, while also supporting values related to a more equitable
society, quality of life, the environment, resilience, and the economy. This draft was
discussed by the Task Force in their December meeting and shared again with the
public. A round of final edits to the portfolio was made and presented to the Task Force
again in early January.
TASK FORCE RECOMMENDATIONS SHARED WITH GOVERNOR: February 2022
The Task Force had the opportunity to submit formal dissent to individual climate actions
in mid-January, where members could articulate grave concern with an action or its
implementation. Dissent is formalized and summarized under individual actions with
names of dissenters and a brief description of dissent. The Task Force then met in
late January 2022 to review dissent and approve this final plan before it was sent
to the Governor on February 1, 2022, for his consideration.
IMPLEMENTATION: February 2022 - Ongoing
Realizing the full benefits of this Climate Action Plan will require concerted effort by state
government, in coordination with federal and local government, industry, academia, civic
organizations, and the public, to implement actions and adaptively manage the plan over
the years to come.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

10

Accounting for Louisiana’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The GHG reduction goals identified in Executive Order JBE 2020-18 were based on the GHG emissions
reduction pathways in the 2018 IPCC Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C, as the most effective way to
limit global warming to 1.5°C. To ensure that Task Force recommendations are informed by the best available
science, a trajectory of emissions from the 2005 baseline alongside a projection of future GHG emissions
without climate action in Louisiana was needed. This section details Louisiana’s 2021 GHG Inventory
Update, containing current and predicted GHG emissions that were used to inform and guide development of
climate actions.

2021 INVENTORY
The Louisiana 2021 GHG Inventory,5 prepared by the LSU CES using data from 2018, provides information
about the GHG emissions across major economic sectors in the state. Using the EPA’s State Inventory Tool (SIT)
methodology, with additional analyses, this inventory is consistent with the methodology used to prepare the
state’s previous inventory. The prior GHG inventory was completed in 2010, using 2005 data.
Louisiana’s net GHG emissions in 2018 were 216 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent (MMT CO2e), compared
to 215 net MMT CO2e in 2005. The state’s emissions have been nearly flat across this time period,
despite increases in industrial production and decreases in coal-fired power generation, among other
changes and trends.
Louisiana’s GHG emissions baseline is unique among states and is significantly different than the nation’s
emissions baseline as whole (Figure 4). In the U.S., 17% of overall national emissions come from the
industrial sector; in Louisiana, the industrial sector contributes an overwhelming 66% of overall state
emissions. Though Louisiana’s GHG emissions are most concentrated in the industrial sector, transportation
and power generation emissions across the state are also significant. The transportation sector is
responsible for 19% of CO2e emissions, and the electric power sector makes up 13% of Louisiana’s
CO2e emissions.

FIGURE 4. SUMMARY OF U .S. AND LOU ISIAN GHG EMISSION SHARES. N OTE: FUEL COMBUST ION VALUES ARE
F ROM FOSSIL FUEL COMBUST ION ONLY. SOURCE: U .S. ENVIRONMENT AL PROTECT ION AGENCY, INVENTORY
O F U . S . G H G E M I S S I O N S A N D S I N K S : 1 9 9 0 - 2 0 1 8 ; A N D S T A T E C O 2e E M I S S I O N S F R O M F O S S I L F U E L
COMBUST ION. FIGURE DERIVED FROM FIGURE 4 IN T HE LOU ISIANA 20 21 GHG INVENTORY.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

11

This unique profile represents a significant challenge for reducing Louisiana’s emissions to net zero by 2050.
Unlike other states, or even national strategies, Louisiana cannot rely primarily on transportation or power sector
strategies to address the vast majority of GHG emissions. Industrial GHG emissions are widely thought of as the
most difficult GHG emissions to abate, and in Louisiana, they account for the significant majority of GHG
emissions.
Compared to the United States, Louisiana’s power generation fuel mix distribution is less diverse (Figure 5).
Louisiana’s power generation fuel mix is composed of 71% natural gas and 1.6% renewable, compared to the
U.S. where 45.3% of power generation is composed of natural gas and 15.3% is renewable. In 2018, industry
accounted for 40% of GHG corresponding to electricity consumption in Louisiana, followed by 34% by residential
and 26% by commercial. 6

FIGURE 5. COMPARI SON OF POWER GENERAT I ON FUEL M IX IN T HE U.S. AND LOU ISIANA IN 2019. SOURCE:
2021
ENERGY INNOVATION ADMINISTRATION. FIGURE REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 16 OF THE LOUISIANA
GHG INVENTORY.

Louisiana’s leading sectors in industrial CO2e emissions include chemical manufacturing, petroleum and
coal (refining), and natural gas processing (Figure 6). Together, these three sectors make up 94% of the
state’s industrial CO2e emissions. In 2019, Louisiana’s top 20 industrial GHG emissions facilities produced
approximately 61 MMT CO2e, which is up nearly 30% from the GHG emissions of the top 20 industrial facilities
in 2012. This increase is primarily due to capital investments and expansions of these facilities.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

12

FIGURE 6. LOU ISIANA INDUS TRIAL GHG EMISSION SHARES B Y SE CTOR FOR 2019 . DAT A SOURCE: U.S. EPA
FLIGHT . FIGURE REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 19 IN T HE L OU ISIANA 202 1 GHG INVENTORY.

In 2019, Louisiana’s top 20 GHG emissions facilities (including power generation facilities) produced
approximately 72.25 MMT CO2e, with an average of 3.613 MMT CO2e, per year. Between 2012 and
2019, total CO2e emissions within the top 20 emitting facilities increased by 5.725 MMT CO2e. The top three
highest GHG emitting facilities in 2019 included the chemical manufacturing facility CF Industries
Nitrogen-Donaldsonville (10.01 MMT CO2e,), petroleum refining and chemical manufacturing complex
ExxonMobil Baton Rouge Complex (6.36 MMT CO2e,), and the power generation facility Brame Energy Center
(5.41 MMT CO2e).
In addition to Louisiana’s current emissions, many industrial expansions or new facilities have been announced
across the state. Based on announced projects that have received air permits, cumulative new industrial GHG
emissions could reach up to 120 MMT CO2e per year. The potential GHG impact of these facilities is included
in the upper bound of the projected Business As Usual model in the following section.

PRO JECT ING A BU SI NESS AS USUA L FUTURE
The ways in which Louisiana’s emissions might increase, particularly from industrial facilities, are important
to consider when taking climate action. The Louisiana EPS Tool, used for both rounds of consequence analysis
and for informing policy design, includes a Business As Usual scenario that factors in some
amount of economic growth, rebounding from a COVID-related recession, and other factors. This Business As
Usual scenario represents a future without climate action, continuing on a trajectory of increased
emissions (Figure 7). There are some uncertainties with the Business As Usual future as well, such as
the approximately 50 announced industrial expansions or new facilities for 2021 or later, noted in the section
above.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

13

Louisiana Business as Usual 2020-2050

FIGURE 7. B USINESS AS U SUAL SCENARIO AND UNCERT AINTY OF GHG EMISSIONS I N LOU ISIANA, 2020 -2050.

However, even the Business As Usual scenario is subject to uncertainty. Emissions could continue to
increase – especially if new facilities and expansions are permitted and built. Those emissions are in the upper
bound of the uncertainty seen in Figure 7 above. Industrial production could continue to increase while
efficiency gains are also made, which might lower emissions; given that the state’s emissions were
essentially flat from 2005 to 2018, this represents the lower bound of the uncertainty. What is certain is
that Business As Usual will not lead to a net zero future for Louisiana, and aggressive action is needed.
The math problem of how Louisiana confronts its emissions is difficult. While this planning process began
with 2005 data, it was unclear until the middle of 2021 that statewide emissions were relatively flat from 2005
to 2018. Without the benefit of that information, the goal-setting for 2025 was done without knowing how far
Louisiana would have to go to achieve reductions from the 2005 baseline. If Louisiana had taken earlier climate
action, those short-term goals may have been achievable. Notably, 2018 GHG emissions from electric power
generation were down by 21% from 2005 levels, while industrial emissions (inclusive of natural gas and oil
systems) rose by 14% over the same period.7
While in some ways Louisiana is catching up to other states that have been taking climate action over the
past decades, in other ways Louisiana is charting new ground. No state has ever attempted to
tackle industrial emissions at this scale. This aggressive plan offers the opportunity for Louisiana to lead
the way in climate action, particularly industrial decarbonization, and set a global example.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

14

The Risks of Inaction: Why Climate Action is Critical for
Louisiana
Climate change is a planetary threat being driven by human-induced increases in GHG concentrations in
the atmosphere that have raised global temperatures and made extreme weather more common.8 In 2019,
CO2e concentrations in the atmosphere were at their highest over the last 2 million years,9 and 19 of the 20
warmest years on record have occurred since 2000.10 Arctic summer sea ice reached its lowest level on record
in 2012,11 and global average sea level has risen faster in the past century than at any time in the past 1000
years.12 The unprecedented fires, droughts, floods, and heatwaves already experienced across the world will
intensify as global temperature continue to increase, putting millions of lives and trillions of dollars of assets at
risk.13 In the midst of these ongoing changes, the most severe impacts have and will continue to fall on the poor
and otherwise marginalized communities.14
Louisiana is among the most vulnerable states in the United States to the impacts of climate change.
Impacts from climate change are significantly affecting the amount of coastal Louisiana that can be preserved
and the effectiveness of state and local restoration and protection efforts. Inland from the coast, other climate
impacts are making flooding more common and heat more unbearable, and they are straining our best efforts
to become more resilient. Most of all, these changes to the environment are translating into hardships for the
people who call this state home—hardships that will continue to increase in scope, scale, and intensity unless
the world comes together to dramatically reduce global GHG emissions.
The impacts to people being felt today in Louisiana include direct physical, mental, and financial tolls from
extreme weather and indirect impacts to social systems and infrastructure that is struggling to cope with
the increasing prevalence and severity of natural disasters. As is the case globally, Louisiana’s low-income
communities, communities of color, Indigenous people, and other marginalized residents are being hit especially
hard because they are more likely to live in areas vulnerable to extreme weather and are typically less financially
able to take on the economic challenges of recovery or relocation (Figure 8). 15 These groups have been excluded
from the opportunity to build wealth for generations, are more likely to live and work in overburdened
communities, are more likely to live in areas with higher flood risk, and are more likely to experience insufficient
or delayed investments in infrastructure and disaster recovery efforts.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

15

Climate Vulnerable Populations – Health Impacts

FIGURE 8. EXAMPLES OF P OPULAT IONS AT HIGHER RIS K OF EXPOSURE T O ADVERSE C LIMAT E -RELATED HEALTH
THREATS ARE SHOWN ALONG WITH ADAPT AT ION MEASURES T HAT CAN HELP ADDRESS DISPROPORT IONAT E
IMPACTS. WHEN CONSIDERI NG T HE FU LL RANGE OF T HREATS FROM CLI MAT E CHANGE AS WELL AS OTHER
ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURE S, T HESE GROUPS ARE AMONG T HE MOST EXPOSED, MOST SENSIT IVE, AND HAVE
THE LEAST INDIVI DUAL AND COMMU NIT Y RESOURCES T O PREPARE FO R AND RE SPOND T O HEALTH T HREATS.
WHIT E T EXT INDICATES T HE RISKS FACED B Y T HOSE C OMMUNIT IES, WHILE DARK TEXT INDICATES ACT
IONS THAT CAN BE T AKEN TO REDUCE T HOSE RISKS. FI GURE REPRODUCED FROM FI GURE 14.2 OF THE
2018 NAT IONAL CLIMAT E ASSESSMENT .

The need for climate action in Louisiana is paramount. Throughout the state, whole communities are being
displaced. People regularly risk losing their cars to flooding from abnormal rain events. Some are unable to
evacuate from hurricanes because they lack the means or must stay and work in order to keep their jobs.
Louisiana is losing its coast and the culture that it supports; inland areas are challenged as well with too much
or too little water or extreme heat; and the state’s economy is consistently stressed by the disruption and
damages of disaster, response, and recovery. This section provides an overview of the scientific underpinnings
to the problem of global climate change and more details on how those environmental changes are producing
impacts to communities, ecosystems, and the economy in Louisiana.
Since 1988, the IPCC has provided scientific information to governments at all levels for the development of
climate policy. The regular reports issued by the IPCC represent contributions from thousands of scientists
spanning the globe who assess the latest published works to arrive at a comprehensive summary of what is
known about climate change. They report on the drivers of climate change, the impacts and future risks
associated with climate change, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce current and future
exposure. 16
In 2018, the IPCC issued its Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C to inform the global response to the threat
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. This report affirmed that human
activities are estimated to have contributed to 1°C of global warming above pre-industrial levels and that global

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

16

warming is anticipated to reach 1.5°C above preindustrial levels between 2032 and 2050 if current rates
continue. This rate of global warming, the IPCC concluded, will increase the overall “climate-related risks to
health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human security, and economic growth.” These risks further
increase as global temperatures rise to 2°C above pre-industrial levels.
In August of 2021, the IPCC released a working group report on the latest scientific understandings of climate
change as well as projections for future warming and its impact on the Earth’s systems. Some of the report’s
conclusions include:
•

There is no doubt that human-induced climate change is already affecting many weather and climate
extremes in every region across the globe.17

•

Global warming of 1.5°C and 2°C will be exceeded during the 21st century unless deep reductions in
CO2 and other GHG emissions occur in the coming decades.18

•

Many changes in the climate system become larger in direct relation to increasing global warming. They
include increases in the frequency and intensity of hot extremes, marine heatwaves, heavy precipitation,
agricultural and ecological droughts in some regions, and proportion of intense tropical cyclones, as well
as reductions in Arctic Sea ice, snow cover, and permafrost.19

•

With further global warming, every region is projected to increasingly experience concurrent and multiple
changes in climatic impact drivers. Changes in several climatic impact drivers would be more
widespread at 2°C compared to 1.5°C global warming and even more widespread and pronounced for
higher warming levels.20

•

From a physical science perspective, limiting human-induced global warming to a specific level requires
limiting cumulative CO2e emissions, reaching at least net zero CO2e emissions along with strong
reductions in other GHG emissions. Strong, rapid, and sustained reductions in methane emissions
would also limit the warming effect resulting from reduced aerosol pollution and improved air quality.21

Scientists working across the 13 federal agencies that comprise the U.S. Global Change Research Program
produce summary reports detailing the impacts of climate change on the U.S., specifically known as the
National Climate Assessment. In 2018, the most recent National Climate Assessment was released with
similar findings as the IPCC report, including the conclusion that “climate change creates new risks and
exacerbates existing vulnerabilities in communities across the U.S., presenting growing challenges to human
health and safety, quality of life, and the rate of economic growth.”22
Another point made by both the IPCC and the National Climate Assessment is the unequal distribution of climate
impacts. The vulnerable, those who are low income, communities of color, children, the elderly, Indigenous
populations, and others who are marginalized have a lower capacity to prepare for and cope with extreme
weather, climate-related events, and other changes.23 Vulnerable populations may also be disproportionately
affected by actions taken to address the underlying causes and impacts of climate change if those inequities
and circumstances are not considered explicitly.
Louisiana is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The 2018 National Climate Assessment
produced four key messages for the southeastern region of the U.S., and each resonates deeply with Louisiana.
1. Urban Infrastructure and Health Risks. Compared to cities in other regions of the country, cities in the
southeast are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts to infrastructure and human health
specifically from increased heat, flooding, and vector-borne diseases. 24

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

17

2. Increasing Flood Risks in Coastal and Low-Lying Regions. Home to people, critical industries, cultural
resources, and tourism economies, the coastal plain and low-lying regions of the southeast are
extremely vulnerable to climate change impacts. Flood frequencies, extreme rainfall events, and sea
level rise will affect property values and the viability of infrastructure. 25
3. Natural Ecosystems will be Transformed. Diverse natural ecosystems that provide multiple social
benefits will be transformed by climate change through changing winter temperature extremes, wildfire
patterns, sea levels, hurricanes, floods, droughts, and warming oceans. These changes will redistribute
species and greatly modify ecosystems. “Future generations can expect to experience and interact with
natural systems that are much different than those that we see today.” 26
4. Economic and Health Risks for Rural Communities. More regular extreme heat and changing seasonal
climates are projected to have impacts on exposure-linked health and economic vulnerabilities in
agricultural, timber, and manufacturing sectors. Reduced labor hours from extreme heat can also
compound existing social stresses. 27
With climate risks manifesting every day and all but certain to grow in severity in the future, the need to reduce
GHG emissions driving global warming is crucial. Reducing GHG emissions is a viable way to mitigate climaterelated risks, increase opportunities for people, and improve or protect quality of life in the long run. As is made
clear in national and international scientific reports, the evidence of human-caused climate change is
overwhelming, the impacts of climate change are present today and intensifying, and the threats to physical,
social, and economic well-being are on the rise. 28 In the coming sections, brief glimpses of climate change’s
current and future potential impacts on Louisiana will be explored through the lenses of social, health, equity,
economic, and environmental outcomes.

HUMA N AN D E NVI RONMENTAL IMPACTS T O LOU IS IANA
Louisiana’s human and physical geography makes it one of the earliest and hardest hit areas of the U.S. when
it comes to experiencing the negative impacts of climate change. The state’s hot and humid climate and location
at the mouth of the Mississippi River and the edge of the Gulf of Mexico carry environmental challenges that
have direct and indirect impacts on communities. While the widespread risks from climate change are alarming,
this troubling fact can be a unifying force across an often fractured political and social spectrum, serving to point
us all toward common action. Despite the commonality of risk experienced across Louisiana, it is also true that
some communities are feeling more pain, greater disruption, and more severe impacts to their health, quality of
life, and economic stability than others. This reality is observed by both the IPCC and the National Climate
Assessment and manifests in Louisiana along racial, income, ethnic, and age categories.
During the planning process a potential future scenario was evaluated to help the Task Force and public
understand the consequences of inaction for the people, economy, and environment in Louisiana. In this
Business As Usual scenario, GHGs were not reduced and climate change was not mitigated beyond what is
being achieved through current trends. This scenario was judged by evaluators on the Task Force’s advisory
groups to produce negative or very negative outcomes across every one of the fundamental objectives. Specific
negative outcomes expected from the strategy of inaction in the Business As Usual scenario included
regional and more widespread negative consequences in the near term and established negative trends that
would persist for the long term.
This section provides an overview of the ways that climate change today is producing impacts to communities
and the environment in Louisiana as well as how those impacts are projected to change in the future.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

18

HEALTH IMPACTS
According to the 2018 National Climate Assessment, climate change is already producing negative health
effects for Americans that will worsen as climate change progresses (Figure 9). In addition to the intensification
of current health challenges, climate change will also bring new challenges to individual and public
health. These challenges will arise as more people are exposed to hazardous conditions like heat waves,
floods, droughts, vector-, food-, and water-borne diseases, deterioration of the quality and safety of water,
air, and food, and additional strains on mental health and well-being.29 Beyond the direct health effects of
extreme weather events, human health can also suffer from the disruption of vital public health, healthcare,
and related systems in ways that can be harmful to health long after a weather event. The following sections
looks at national and Louisiana-specific ways that human health suffers because of climate change.

Climate Change and Health

FIGURE 9. THIS CONCEPTUAL DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATES THE KEY PATHWAYS BY WHICH CLIMATE CHANGE
INFLUENCES HUMAN HEAL TH DURING AN EXTREME HEAT EVENT , AND POTENT IAL RESULT ING HEALTH
OUTCOMES (CENTER BOXES). T HESE EXPOSURE PATHWAYS EXIST WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF OTHER FACTORS
THAT POSIT IVELY OR NEGAT IVELY INFLUENCE HEALTH OUTCOMES (GRAY SIDE BOX ES). KEY FACTORS T HAT
INFLUENCE VULNERAB ILIT Y FOR INDIVIDUALS ARE SHOWN IN THE RIGHT BOX , AND INCLUDE SOCIAL
DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH AND BEHAVIORAL CHOICES. KEY FACTORS T HAT INFLUENCE VULNERAB ILIT Y AT
LARGER SCALES, SUCH AS NATURAL AND BU ILT ENVIRONMENTS, GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT , AND
INST ITUT IONS, ARE SHOWN IN THE LEFT BOX. ALL OF THESE INFLUENCING FACTORS CAN AFFECT AN
INDIVIDUAL’S OR A COMMUNIT Y’S VULNERAB ILIT Y THROUGH CHANGES IN EXPOSURE, SENSIT IVIT Y, AND
ADAPT IVE CA PACIT Y AND MAY ALSO BE AFFECTED BY CLIMATE CHANGE. REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE
1, IMPACTS O F CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH IN THE UNITED STATES (2016).

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

19

H EAT
Globally, more than 1/3 of heat-related deaths can be attributed to the extra warming associated with climate
change which, in many locations, adds up to dozens to hundreds of deaths each year. 30 In the U.S., more deaths
are caused by extreme heat than by any other severe weather event. 31 As the climate continues to change, the
dangers of heat exposure will increase as extreme heat becomes more frequent with both higher summer
temperatures overall and the onset of high temperatures earlier in the spring and lasting longer into the fall. The
effects of warmer temperatures are of particular concern in Louisiana because the state experiences some of
the highest average summer temperatures in the nation and because high humidity further compounds the
impact of high heat on the body by impairing its ability to cool the body through evaporation of sweat.
Heat is particularly dangerous to human health because core body temperature must be maintained within a
very narrow range. Normally, when the body’s internal temperature increases above the range, mechanisms
such as sweating and increased blood flow work to emit excess body heat. In situations of extreme internal
heat, the body’s coping mechanisms are compromised, resulting in a cascade of heat-related illnesses ranging
from mild effects like dehydration to severe health effects such as heat exhaustion or heat stroke which can
result in multi-organ failure and possibly death.32 Even when heat is not deadly, exposure to excessive heat can
exacerbate chronic conditions, increase injuries, and diminish productivity and labor capacity.
The extreme heat and humidity that increasingly characterize Louisiana’s summers pose important health
risks to everyone, but the most vulnerable are the young, elderly, people with chronic health conditions, and
outdoor workers.33 Infants and young children (ages 0-9) and the elderly (> 80 years) have lower rates of
heat-related illness than other age groups but more severe health outcomes. Immature thermoregulation in
the systems of young children cause rapid increases in core body temperature compared to adults, and they are
also vulnerable to the actions of others because they rely on parents or caretakers to protect them from
overexposure. Infant and child vulnerability to high heat can have severe consequences; for example,
hyperthermia is the leading cause of non-crash-related vehicle deaths for children younger than 14 years of
age, with an average of 38 deaths per year in the U.S.34 Individuals over eighty are more susceptible to heat
due to a number of factors including less efficient sweat cooling mechanisms, reduced capacity for pumping
blood than younger adults, decreases in overall fitness, and exacerbation of pre-existing health conditions.
Co-morbidities, such as heart conditions, can also impair the heart’s ability to properly circulate blood and
cool the body, and high blood pressure and diabetes impair the blood vessels’ ability to dilate properly, which
also restricts blood flow.
Extreme heat is already on the rise in Louisiana, first shown statewide in Figure 10 but particularly in urban
areas that experience higher air temperatures associated with the urban heat island effect. The National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Center for Environmental Information released
state climate summaries in January of 2022, concluding temperatures in Louisiana have risen by 0.5°F
since the beginning of the 20th century with the warmest consecutive 5-year interval most recent from
2016-2020. In Figure 10, NOAA predicts a potential 12°F warming by the end of the century. Specific to
urban areas, Baton Rouge, Lake Charles, and Monroe each saw 22 more days above 95° F, Lafayette had
20 additional days, New Orleans 15, and Alexandria had 13 additional days over 95°F compared to
1970.35 Climate Central published another study of the urban heat island effect in U.S. cities and ranked
New Orleans the worst of 159 cities nationwide. This study found that temperatures in New Orleans could
be as much as 9° warmer inside the city than in areas outside of developed areas. Lafayette,
Louisiana, ranked 19th.36 Looking to the future, a study by the Union of Concerned Scientists
estimated that Louisianans will experience three full months where the heat index is over 105 by the end of the
century.37

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

20

Observed and Projected Temperature Change

FIGURE 10. OBSERVED AND PROJECTED CHANGES (COMPARED TO THE 1901–1960 AVERAGE) IN NEARSURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE FOR LOUISIANA. OBSERVED DATA ARE FOR 1900–2020. PROJECTED CHANGES
FOR 2006–2100 ARE FROM GLOBAL CLIMATE MODELS FOR TWO POSSIBLE FUTURES: ONE IN WHICH GHG
EMISSIONS CONTINUE TO INCREASE (HIGHER EMISSIONS) AND ANOTHER IN WHICH GHG EMISSIONS INCREASE
AT A SLOWER RATE (LOWER EMISSIONS). SHADING INDICATES THE RANGE OF ANNUAL TEMPERATURES FROM
THE SET OF MODELS. OBSERVED TEMPERATURES ARE GENERALLY WITHIN THE ENVELOPE OF MODEL
SIMULATIONS OF THE HISTORICAL PERIOD (GRAY SHADING). HISTORICALLY UNPRECEDENTED WARMING IS
PROJECTED DURING THIS CENTURY. LESS WARMING IS EXPECTED UNDER A LOWER EMISSIONS FUTURE (THE
COLDEST END-OF-CENTURY PROJECTED YEARS BEING ABOUT AS WARM AS THE HOTTEST YEAR IN THE
HISTORICAL RECORD; GREEN SHADING) AND MORE WARMING UNDER A HIGHER EMISSIONS FUTURE (THE
HOTTEST END-OF-CENTURY PROJECTED YEARS BEING ABOUT 10°F WARMER THAN THE HOTTEST YEAR IN THE
HISTORICAL RECORD; RED SHADING). REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 1 OF THE NOAA NATIONAL CENTERS FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION LOUISIANA STATE CLIMATE SUMMARY, 2022.

Within a city, factors like the amount of green space and tree canopy; the amount of heat absorbed and radiating
from surfaces like asphalt, highways, and parking lots; architectural choices; and surface reflectivity can create
a “heat gap” between neighborhoods that can be disproportionately experienced along racial and economic
lines. National studies have documented a lack of tree canopy and a greater instance of impervious surfaces in
low-income communities relative to high-income communities, 38 and parts of cities that are poorer and with
higher concentrations of residents of color can be 5°F to 20°F hotter in the summer than wealthier and whiter
areas of the same city. 39 According to a 2021 study in the journal Nature Communications, the average person
of color lives in a census tract with a higher surface urban heat island intensity than non-Hispanic whites in all
but 6 of the 175 largest urbanized areas in the continental U.S. A similar pattern was found for people living in
households below the poverty line relative to households more than two times the poverty line. 40
In 2016, a study by the University of Richmond found that this heat gap was a reflection of redlining practices
perpetrated throughout the 1900s. Beginning in the 1930s, the federal Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC)
created racially-biased “residential security” maps in hundreds of cities that fueled the practice of denying
access to federally backed mortgages and credit to racial minorities. Within New Orleans, the only Louisiana city

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

21

included in the University of Richmond study, a 4.6-degree heat gap was observed between the “most desirable”
neighborhoods in New Orleans and those labeled “hazardous” by HOLC maps.41
Vulnerability to heat is also influenced by a number of socio-economic and community factors that can
amplify health threats, such as poor housing, social isolation, and limited commercial infrastructure.42 About
20% of Louisianans live in poverty with sharp racial disparities: 34% poverty among African-Americans
compared with 12% among whites. Housing factors, particularly older buildings and mobile homes, can
increase susceptibility to HRI as they may not be able to effectively cool their homes and, in some cases, may
have no air conditioning or are unable to afford the cost of using their air conditioner. Access to airconditioned environments is particularly important during periods of high heat and humidity when there is
minimal variation between the daily maximum and minimum temperature.
High heat also carries environmental and economic implications for Louisiana. Seasonal changes to temperature
caused by climate change are disrupting the natural system and the ability for people to make a living from those
systems. Heat is a well-recognized occupational hazard and workers may be one of the highest at-risk
populations for HRI and are often among the first to be exposed to the impacts of climate change. 43 Unlike other
vulnerable groups who may be at a greater liberty to respond, workers’ exposure and responses are largely
controlled by their job requirements and employer. About one-quarter of Louisiana’s workforce is at risk of HRI
due to outdoor and physically demanding work: agriculture, construction, oil and gas, transportation, utilities,
and some manufacturing. Indoor workers who work in non-climate-controlled environments, such as warehouses
and factories, are also at risk. Accordingly, the highest rates of hospitalization or emergency room visits for heatrelated illness in Louisiana are among working-age men. Studies have also documented that Louisiana has a
higher rate of occupational heat-related illness than other southeastern states, and one of the highest rates of
all U.S. states. 44 By the end of the century, it is estimated that health concerns from increased heat could result
in a reduction of labor hours by more than five hundred million in the Southeast for high-risk industries, such as
agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, manufacturing, transportation, and utilities (Figure 11). 45 All of these factors
contribute to worker vulnerability and reduced work capacity and productivity resulting in negative economic
impacts for LA workers and employers.

C hang e in Hour s W ork e d - 2 0 9 0

FIGURE 11. T HIS MA P SHOWS T HE EST IMATED PERCENT CHANGE IN HOURS WORKED IN 2090 UNDER A HIGHER
SCENARIO ( RCP8. 5). P ROJE CT IONS INDICATE AN ANNUA L AVERAGE O F 5 70 MILLION LABOR HOURS LOST PER
YEAR IN THE SOUTHEAST B Y 2 090 (WITH MODELS RANGING FROM 340 MILLI ON TO 820 MILLION LABOR
HOURS). EST IMATES REPRE SENT A CHANGE IN HOURS WORKED AS COMPARED T O A 2003 –2007 AVERAGE
BASELINE FOR HIGH-RISK INDUSTRIES ONLY. T HESE INDUSTRIES ARE DEFINED AS AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
AND FI SHING; HUNT ING, MI NING, AND C ONSTRUCT ION; MANUFACTURING, T RANSPORT AT ION, AND U T ILIT
IES. SOURCE: ADAPTED FROM EPA 201 7. REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 1 9.21 OF THE 2018
NAT IONAL CLIMATE ASSESSMENT RE PORT .

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

22

Hurricanes and other weather events also have multiple heat-health impacts as response and recovery work
involve long and strenuous work during very hot temperatures and frequently without access to air conditioning.
Additionally, many non-acclimated volunteers and residents engage in physically demanding work or
operation.46 There were five heat-related fatalities due to Hurricane Laura including two men who died while
removing storm debris.47
AIR QUALITY
According to the 2018 National Climate Assessment, “more than 100 million people in the U.S. live in
communities where air pollution exceeds health-based air quality standards,” and unless specific action to
improve air quality is taken, “climate change will worsen existing air pollution levels.”48 “This worsened air
pollution,” the National Climate Assessment reports, “would increase the incidence of adverse respiratory
and cardiovascular health effects, including premature death.”49 As the climate continues to change,
heat-related health risks will intensify, and progress toward clean air will become even more difficult.50
Many of the factors that contribute to air quality are connected to weather. For example, higher temperatures
promote the increased formation of ozone and stagnant weather conditions can produce higher concentrations
of particulate matter. Both carry their own deleterious health effects like triggering asthma attacks and increased
risk of premature death from heart or lung disease. 51 Particulate matter concentrations are affected by wildfire
emissions and air stagnation episodes, among other factors. By increasing these different factors, climate
change is projected to lead to increased concentrations of ozone and particulate matter in some regions.
Increases in global temperatures could cause associated increases in premature deaths related to worsened
ozone and particle pollution. 52
Estimates that assume no change in regulatory controls or population characteristics range from 1,000 to
4,300 additional premature deaths nationally per year by 2050 from combined ozone and particle health effects.
The response of airborne particles to climate change is less certain than the response of ozone. The current
effect of ozone air pollution that exceed national standards has been estimated at $6.5 billion (in 2008 U.S.
dollars) in health-related costs nationwide, based on a U.S. assessment of health impacts from ozone levels from
2000–2002. 53 A more recent study estimated that ozone pollution could account for approximately $580 billion
in annual global health and economic costs by 2050. 54
Even with population and economic growth, ozone air quality in the U.S. has improved dramatically due to
pollution control efforts for specific emissions, leading to a drop by 22% between 1990 and 2016. Louisiana has
also shared in this positive trend but not to the degree of the rest of the country. 55 In a 2021 analysis of EPA
data, the Louisiana Legislative Auditor found a 20.9% increase in good air quality days in Louisiana and a 75%
decrease in unhealthy air quality days between 2008 and 2018. Among the state’s top four air pollutants,
nitrogen oxides declined by 25.2%, sulfur dioxide by 43%, carbon monoxide by 27.8%, and volatile organic
compounds by 16.3%. However, 2 0 1 8 National Climate Assessment warns that “the prevailing
evidence strongly suggests” climate change will partially counteract the progress made in reducing ozone
precursors.56
The 2018 National Climate Assessment clearly documents that impacts to air quality, particularly ozone and
particulate matter-related effects, will harm certain groups more than others: the elderly, children, and those
with chronic illnesses.57 Impacts from climate change on outdoor air quality will affect urban areas where
larger proportions of minority, low-income, and immigrant populations reside. People of color are
particularly affected by air pollution because of disproportionate exposure in urban areas and higher
prevalence of underlying diseases, such as asthma and COPD, that makes them more sensitive.58

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

23

A recent study by researchers at the EPA-funded Center for Air, Climate, and Energy Solutions found that people
of color are largely exposed to more particulate air pollution on average across income level, within individual
states, and within individual urban and rural areas. 59 These findings were reinforced by a November 2021 EPA
report on Climate Change and Social Vulnerability in the United States. In the report, the EPA found that - among
the social vulnerability factors of income, race, education, and age - people of color are most likely to currently
live in areas that are projected to have the highest levels of climate change impacts with 2° Celsius of warming
or 50 cm of global sea level rise. Citing its most recent Particulate Matter Integrated Science Assessment, EPA
acknowledged that “race and ethnicity are important factors in determining PM2.5 related risk and that Black
individuals, in particular, are at increased risk for health effects, in part due to disparities in exposure.”60 For
example, Black individuals are 41-60% more likely than others to currently live in areas with the highest projected
increases in premature mortality from climate-driven changes in PM2.5. Black individuals are also 34% more
likely to live in areas with the highest projected increases in childhood asthma diagnoses due to climate-driven
changes in particulate air pollution.60
The final “key message” in the 2018 National Climate Assessment related to air quality, human health, and
climate change points to the potential for co-benefits across these three categories as a result of
mitigating GHG emissions. “Many emission sources of greenhouse gases also emit air pollutants that harm
human health. Controlling these common emission sources would both mitigate climate change and have
immediate benefits for air quality and human health. Because methane is both a greenhouse gas and an ozone
precursor, reductions of methane emissions have the potential to simultaneously mitigate climate change and
improve air quality.”61
WILDFIRES
While not a natural disaster that gets a tremendous amount of attention in the state of Louisiana, climate
change is projected to increase the risk of wildfire. This increased likelihood of wildfires carries associated risks
from air emissions with harmful health impacts. According to the Department of Agriculture and Forestry
(LDAF), there are 18.9 million acres of land under fire protection by LDAF and the state’s wildfire occurrence
is “high” by regional and national standards.”62 Between 2007 and 2016, an average of 1,413 wildfires
burned almost 15,000 acres of forestland each year in Louisiana.63
Long periods of record high temperatures are also associated with droughts that contribute to dry conditions and
lengthen the wildfire season in some areas.64 Wildfire smoke contains particulate matter, carbon monoxide,
nitrogen oxides, and various volatile organic compounds (ozone precursors), which can significantly reduce local
air quality and air quality in areas downwind of fires. Smoke exposure increases respiratory and cardiovascular
hospitalizations; emergency department visits; medication dispensations for asthma, bronchitis, chest pain,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and respiratory infections; and medical visits for lung illnesses.
DISEASE
Climate change is affecting the transmission of many different diseases by directly altering the pathogens’
biology and the organisms that carry the pathogens, as well as by indirectly altering transmission due to changes
to ecosystems or human behavior. 65 Mosquitos, ticks, and other disease-carrying animals - known as “vectors” can be expected to have altered ranges, seasonal distributions, or abundance as climate change continues to
impact weather patterns, ecosystems, and human land use and demographics. These changes can also lead to
new interactions between species which can heighten the likelihood of disease spread from animals to
humans.66 For example, the southeastern region of the U.S. already has the most favorable conditions for the
Aedes aegypti mosquito, which can carry diseases such as dengue fever and the Zika virus. Warming
temperatures associated with climate change has potential to expand mosquito habitat and increase risk of
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

24

disease. 67 Climate change can also affect life cycle traits of disease-carrying mosquitos like biting rate, lifespan,
population size, distribution, and egg laying. 68
Prime conditions for bacterial and fungal diseases can also be expected to expand under a changing climate. As
these pathogens evolve to be more heat tolerant than other related species, they may be more capable of moving
between habitats, across species, and into humans. 69 Respiratory pathogens, such as the influenza virus, persist
year-round in tropical locations while being more seasonal in temperate environments. As tropical conditions
expand with climate change, there is the potential for the evolution of these types of viruses. 70 For individuals,
respiratory infections from viruses can also be heightened by air pollution which is a risk for urbanizing areas
and can carry disproportionate impacts for low-income communities and communities of color. 71
As water temperatures increase, it can change the seasonality and range of pathogens and harmful algae. As
rainfall events become more frequent and intense, runoff can create negative impacts for recreational bodies of
water and drinking water sources and cause additional problems for inadequate water and sewer infrastructure
that can in turn lead to bacterial and viral contamination of water that can be harmful to public health. 72
M E NT A L H E ALT H
A number of mental health impacts can be attributed to the stress caused by climate change-related
circumstances. These mental health effects interact with other health, social, and environmental stressors in
ways that can compound and negatively affect an individual’s mental well-being. As with so many other impacts
of climate change, some groups are more likely than others to be at risk to the negative mental health effects,
including those with preexisting mental illness, first responders, the elderly, pregnant women, the economically
disadvantaged, and Indigenous peoples. 73 Experiencing a flood, even flood risk, has been documented to
produce higher levels of depression and anxiety that can persist for years after the event. 74 Disasters and
droughts are also linked to increased use of alcohol and tobacco, and higher temperatures can lead to an
increase in aggressive behaviors.

I MPACTS TO I NDI GENO US PEOPLES
In addition to the ways that everyone is affected by climate change, Indigenous peoples are also uniquely and
disproportionately impacted because of the compounding health issues related to the loss of traditional foods,
practices, and the mental stress of adaptation alongside the damage to ecosystems, species, and land that
carry cultural, economic, and historical significance.75 The 2018 National Climate Assessment contains an
entire chapter dedicated to the challenges posed by an ever-changing climate on Indigenous peoples
nationwide and the contributions Indigenous peoples have made to the understanding of local and national
climate change risks in earlier assessments. The ability of Indigenous peoples to adapt to climate-changeinduced changes can also be thwarted by limitations to self-determination that arise differently for federally or
state-recognized tribes and non-federally or non-state recognized tribes.76
In matters of health, Indigenous peoples can be even more vulnerable to the physical challenges brought on by
climate change because of historical and ongoing social, political, and economic factors with tangible impacts
on human health, called “social determinants of health.” While health outcomes vary regionally, Indigenous
peoples are disproportionately more likely to suffer from asthma, cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer’s
disease or dementia, diabetes, and obesity alongside increased disparities exacerbated by climate-induced
changes to pollen, air quality, and extreme weather events.77
Indigenous peoples are 48% more likely than others to currently live in areas where the highest percentage of
land is projected to be inundated due to sea level rise (Figure 12). 78 They are also 37% more likely to live in

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

25

areas with the highest projected labor hours lost due to increased high-temperature days from employment in
weather-exposed industries. 79 In coastal Louisiana, hurricanes, saltwater intrusion, erosion, subsidence, sea
level rise, and manmade challenges - like the creation of canals and oil spills - fracture wetlands and have all
undermined the ability of Indigenous people to carry on traditional activities. In 2020, four non-federally
recognized tribes from coastal Louisiana joined with another tribe from Alaska in a protest to the United Nations,
arguing that sea level rise and coastal erosion had overcome burial sites and that continued land loss threatens
food sources. Protestors also brought attention to how the federal and state governments have done too little to
address these changes. 80 Indigenous peoples in coastal Louisiana are also working toward or actively pursuing
relocation as an adaptation strategy to environmental risk. 81 In 2021, Hurricane Ida was particularly devastating
for many of Louisiana’s Indigenous peoples who live in the southeastern portion of the state. The category four
storm destroyed 68 of 80 homes in the Pointe-Au-Chien community and all of the homes on Isle de Jean
Charles. 82 Almost every member of the Grand Caillou/Dulac Band of the Biloxi-Chitimacha-Choctaw suffered the
complete or near complete loss of their homes, 83 and as many as 15,000 members of the United Houma Nation,
the largest tribe in Louisiana, also lost their homes. 84 The lack of federal recognition has hampered the ability of
many of Louisiana’s Indigenous peoples from qualifying for direct disaster assistance. The United Houma Nation,
for example, have been advocating for federal recognition for forty years, but the rigorous process of obtaining
recognition is further being challenged by climate change. Required documentation becomes more difficult to
attain, as communities continue to be displaced by land loss and natural disasters. 85

FIGURE 12. A FEDERAL GRANT IS BEING USED TO RELOCATE THE TRIBAL COMMU NIT Y OF ISLE DE JEAN
CHARLES, LOU ISIANA, IN RESPONSE TO SEVERE LAND LOSS, SEA LEVEL RISE, AND COASTAL FLOODING.
LEFT/MIDDLE IMAGES FROM FIGURE 15. 3, CH. 15: T RIBES (PHOTO CREDIT : RONALD ST INE). AS PART OF
TH E R E S E T T L E M E N T O F T H E T R I B A L C O M M U N I T Y O F I S L E D E J E A N C H A R L E S , R E S I D E N T S A R E W O R K I N G W I T H
T HE LOWLANDER CENTER AND T HE ST ATE OF LOU ISIANA T O FINALIZE A PLAN THAT REFLECTS T HE DESIRES
OF T HE COMMUNITY (RIGHT). FROM FIGURE 15. 4, CH. 15: TRIBES (PHOTO PROVIDED BY LOUISIANA
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ). REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 1.17 OF THE 2018
NAT IONAL
CLIMATE ASSESSMENT REPORT .

E N V I R O N M E N T A L IM P A C T S
Louisiana’s coastal plain has been slowly sinking for nearly a century with approximately 2,000 square miles of
land lost since the 1930s. As climate change-driven global warming increases sea levels, coastal Louisiana’s
challenge to staying above water will also increase. According to the 2018 National Climate Assessment,
relative to the year 2000, global average sea level rise is predicted to increase by 1 to 4.3 feet by 2100 with
the western Gulf of Mexico likely to experience relative sea level rise greater than the global average.86 As
sea levels rise, some coastal ecosystems will be submerged and converted to open water; saltwater
penetration will move further inland and displace inland ecosystems; and hurricane impacts will stretch
further onshore and cause additional ecological changes.87
Louisiana’s coastal land loss crisis has already exposed nearly two million people to the dangers of storm surgebased flooding with some communities threatened to be completely submerged three or four decades into the
future. Projections in the 2017 Coastal Master Plan indicate that, without significant investment in coastal
restoration and protection projects, southern Louisiana could lose between 2,254 and 4,123 square miles of

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

26

additional land over the next fifty years. Even with a $50 billion investment in implementation of every project in
the Coastal Master Plan, between 1,454 and 2,965 square miles of coastline are still likely to be submerged
due to continued subsidence and sea level rise (Figure 13). 88

Flood Depths – Future Without Action, Medium Scenario

FIGURE 13. SHOWN HERE ARE 1% ANNUAL CHANCE STORM FLOOD DEPTHS 50 YEARS FROM NOW UNDER T HE
MEDIUM ENVIRONMENTAL S CENARIO IF NO A DDIT IONAL ACT ION IS TAKEN. RE PRODUCED FROM FIGURE
3.15 OF T HE 2017 LOU ISI ANA COAST AL MASTER PLAN.

This loss of land translates directly into greater exposure to hurricane risk, an exposure that will also increase as
hurricane characteristics change in response to global warming. This level of risk poses an existential threat to
individuals, families, neighborhoods, entire towns, and economies alongside vibrant cultural traditions, hunting
and fishing grounds, and long-held, sacred lands. Because they had become indistinguishable from open water,
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had already removed the names of forty locations
from Louisiana nautical maps, including bays, bayous, and small islands by 2014. 89 The 2018 National
Climate Assessment estimates that one meter of sea level rise will erase over 13,000 recorded historic and
prehistoric archaeological sites alongside more than 1,000 locations currently eligible for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places across the Southeast.90
Climate change is also having an impact on the ability of coastal residents to get out of harm’s way when
hurricanes approach. The greater frequency and rapid intensification of hurricanes, as seen most recently in
Hurricanes Harvey, Michael, Laura, and Delta, have been partially attributed to climate change (Figure 14).91
For example, Hurricane Delta went from a Tropical Depression to a Category 4 storm in less than two days.92
Fast moving changes in a hurricane's strength, especially before landfall, can pose challenges for forecasters
and can make effective evacuations impossible, which are already challenging for senior citizens, people
with disabilities, and those physically or economically unable to leave their homes or jobs. Storm surge and
coastal flooding events can also lead to disastrous indirect challenges from impacts to transportation
networks to reduced capacity of healthcare facilities.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

27

Total Hurricane Events in Louisiana

FIGURE 14. TOT AL NUMBER OF HURRICANE EVENTS (WIND SPEEDS REACHING HURRICANE STRENGTH
SOMEWHERE IN T HE ST AT E) FOR LOU ISIANA FROM 1900 T O 2 02 0. B ARS SHOW 5-YE AR T OT ALS ( LAST B AR IS
A 6-YEAR T OT AL) . ON AVERAGE, LOU ISIANA IS STRUCK BY A HURRICANE ABOUT ONCE EVERY T HREE YEARS .
FROM 2 005 T O 2009, LOU I SIANA WAS STRUCK B Y 6 H URRICANES, T HE LARGEST NUMBER DURING A 5-YEAR
PERIOD SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THE 20TH CENTURY. SOURCE: NOAA HURRICANE RESEARCH DIVISI ON.
REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 5 OF THE NOAA NAT IONAL CENT ERS FOR ENVIRONMENT AL I NFORMAT ION
LOU ISIANA ST AT E CLIMAT E SUMMARY, 2 022.

Other implications of environmental change are also affecting fishing and seafood harvesting. According to the
2018 National Climate Assessment, fishing and oyster harvesting activities along the coast will
face “substantial challenges” (p 777). Challenges such as increased ocean temperature, acidification,
and sea level rise translate to a decline in oyster harvests by between 20% and 46%.93
All across Louisiana, people and ecosystems must adjust to the extremes of too much or too little water. Flooding
– be it from storm surge, persistent high tides, increasingly heavy downpours, or rivers swollen from up-basin
precipitation patterns – affects populations throughout the state. Even floods that do not force people from their
homes disrupt lives, add financial and emotional stress to individuals and families, and strain resources that
could be invested elsewhere. Moreover, temperature and rainfall impact livestock as well. While some crops
may become newly viable alternatives under changing conditions, climate change creates challenges for
existing crops and overall impact will be negative. Decreasing productivity in cotton, corn, soybeans, and rice is
expected with higher temperatures as are increased stresses on livestock. Changes in precipitation patterns can
also be expected to impact forestry (Figure 15).94

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

28

Agricultural Productivity

FIGURE 15. THE PRO JECT ED PERCENT CHANGE IN THE YIELD OF CORN, WHEAT , SOYBEANS, AND COT TON
THROUGH THE YEAR 2100. U NITS REPRESENT AVERAGE PERCENT CHANGE IN YIELDS UNDER A MODELLED
SCENARIO OF HI GH CLIMAT E CHANGE COMPARED TO A SCENARIO OF NO ADDIT IONAL CLIMAT E CHANGE.
WARMER COLORS ( NEGAT IV E PERCENT CHANGE) INDICA T E LARGE PROJECTED DECLINES IN YIELDS; C OOLER
COLORS ( GREEN) INDICAT E MODERAT E PROJECT ED I NCREASES IN YIELDS. S OURCE : ADAPT ED FROM HSIANG
ET AL. (2017). DAT A WERE N OT AVAILABLE FOR T HE U .S. CARIB BEAN, ALASKA, O R HAWAI‘I AND U .S.-A FFILIAT ED
PACIFIC ISLANDS REGIO NS. REPRODUCED FROM FIGURE 7.6 OF THE NAT IONAL CLIMA T E ASSESSMENT RE PORT ,
2018

ECONOMIC IMPACTS TO LOUISIANA
The impacts of climate change are exceedingly costly. These costs strain individual households, cities,
states, and countries and can even threaten the health of the global financial system.95 According to NOAA’s
National Centers for Environmental Information, in 2020 “[t]here were 22 separate billion-dollar weather
or climate related disaster events, shattering the previous annual record of 16 events, which occurred
in 2017 and 2011.”96 It was also the sixth year in a row with 10 or more billion-dollar natural disasters.97
Further, Hurricane Laura’s $19 billion in damage was the costliest event of 2020.98 According to the 2018
National Climate Assessment, without sustained and substantial mitigation and adaptation efforts, “climate
change is expected to cause growing losses to American infrastructure and property and impede the
rate of economic growth over this century” (p 25). In combination with other losses caused from impacts to
human health and the environment, annual economic losses have the potential to reach hundreds of
billions of dollars by the end of the century, which is more than the gross domestic product of many states.99
Estimates of future risk to Louisiana include two prominent examples from the coast. As noted in the 2017
Coastal Master Plan, economic costs to Louisiana from coast-wide annual damages from a 100-year storm event
are estimated to reach $12.1 billion dollars within 50 years.100 Further, an economic study by LSU estimated
that a storm with a similar track to Hurricane Katrina could cause $138 billion in damages to the New Orleans
region in a future without coastal investments, even with the existing $14.5 billion Hurricane Storm Damage Risk
Reduction System that protects the city with levees.101

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

29

Climate change also increases the frequency and likelihood of chronic conditions that also pose high economic
costs for states like Louisiana. Rainfall events that do not rise to the level of a federal disaster, nuisance flooding,
and saltwater intrusion also bring financial costs to homeowners and municipalities, weakening infrastructure
and leading to costly repairs, replacement, or redesign. Damages to the economy also occur as transportation
and commodity networks are interrupted by major and minor climate-related events. Existing federal flood
insurance rate maps that do not account for the future flood risk anticipated as a result of climate change or
new development also create considerable unknown risk in the built environment. The nonprofit First Street
Foundation created a tool that estimates and communicates a property’s flood risk from riverine, rainfall, tidal,
and storm surge sources as well as an estimate of how environmental factors change over time due climate
change. According to their calculations, 14.6 million properties across the country are at substantial risk
including 5.9 million who are currently not identified as being within a FEMA special flood hazard area. Louisiana,
already one of the most at-risk states, is estimated to see an increase in flood risk of 69.7% by 2050. 102
Additionally, as global demand gradually shifts away from carbon-based fuels, some refineries may close
because of reduced demand or because the cost of continued operations is too high to remain profitable.
Louisiana is currently home to 20% of U.S. refining capacity, 103 so large changes in this sector is particularly
concerning for the state in a variety of ways. Large facilities are major, if not the largest, employers in the
communities in which they reside and often among the largest taxpayers. If and when they decide to close, local
communities are at risk from the direct job losses, and indirect effects from the loss of wages and taxes flowing
into the local economy. A final community risk linked to the economics of the energy transition is related to
underperforming or unsold facilities that may experience damages from hurricanes or other extreme weather
events. Natural disasters can further reduce the economic viability of a facility and potentially expose their
communities to hazards after a disaster.
A Reuters report linked refinery sales in the U.S. to a pandemic-related reduction in demand for gasoline and jet
fuel alongside an accelerated shift among top auto makers to electric vehicles. 104 These assertions were
supported by comments from the CEO of Phillips 66 who indicated that he believed, “the U.S. refining business
in the future is going to be smaller, not bigger.” 105 In the past two years, Louisiana has experienced two examples
of this trend. In one case, a refinery in St. James Parish closed as “part of the company’s global strategy to invest
in a core set of uniquely integrated manufacturing sites that are strategically positioned for the transition to a
low-carbon future.” 106 And in the second case, a decision was made to convert a refinery in Plaquemines Parish
to an oil terminal after a brief attempt to sell the facility and damages from Hurricane Ida. 107
Other types of future economic losses are possible as markets and investors make decisions about community
capacity to address climate risk and about the ability of existing industrial facilities to minimize their carbon
footprint. Investors, large financial institutions, and bond ratings agencies are beginning to consider risks posed
by climate change in their decisions today. These determinations could have real impacts on a community’s
ability to finance infrastructure or a business's cost of raising capital.

CONCLUSI ON OF IMPACT S
Whether drawing from the 2018 National Climate Assessment, the IPCC, or other research around climate
impacts, it is clear why the Task Force’s advisory groups evaluated the Business As Usual scenario as
unacceptable for Louisiana. According to their analysis, the risks of inaction were too high and maintaining
the status quo was synonymous with falling behind. In their estimation, inaction would lead to
worsening conditions for infrastructure, public health, cultural preservation, and the environment, and
marginalized populations would continue to experience a disproportionate share of the damages. Additionally,
the necessity of adapting to our changing environment would become more difficult with communities and
ecosystems becoming less resilient. On the economic front, market pressures to reduce carbon in the

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

30

economy would continue to put pressure on the energy sector, capital markets, banking, and insurance, which
would also be expected to produce long-term negative economic implications for the state.
Without special attention from policymakers, social and economic factors – such as community access to safe
housing and transportation; experiences of racism, discrimination, and violence; or access to resources like
educational and workforce opportunities – will invariably exacerbate climatic conditions and impacts. 108 Today’s
existing vulnerabilities and inequities need to remain in focus as the state copes with the consequences of a
changing climate and implements this Action Plan to avert the worst impacts of climate change and grow an
inclusive, low-carbon economy.
Not only were negative or very negative outcomes predicted by the Task Force’s advisory groups along social,
economic, and environmental objectives from a strategy of inaction, but these consequences were also expected
to be accompanied by steadily rising GHG emissions. Modeling results from the Business As Usual scenario in
the EPS tool indicate that Louisiana’s GHG emissions would grow through 2050 with the 200 million metric tons
of CO2e emissions produced in 2020 growing to 261.9 million metric tons in 2050. This path of inaction can be
predicted to perpetuate and worsen Louisiana’s human, ecological, and economic vulnerabilities to climate
change while increasing GHG emissions that will drive even more disasters. This downward spiral of impacts has
potential to damage the state while simultaneously decreasing Louisiana’s capacity to cope and adapt.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

31

Realizing the Benefits of this Climate Action Plan
The dangers of inaction in the face of climate change in Louisiana are staggering. They threaten tremendous
harm to our people, natural environment, and economy. The silver lining is that the state is joining a growing
chorus of countries, subnational governments, and private corporations that are endeavoring to do their part
to lower the GHG emissions that are driving these catastrophic changes to the Earth’s atmosphere.
While dangerous consequences from climate change are already manifesting here and around the world,
these risks can be mitigated, and adaptation efforts can be more successful if the global community is
successful in keeping global warming below 1.5°, or even 2°C, by the end of this century.109 Every actor at
every level has a role to play in achieving this global goal, including Louisiana.
To achieve the level of GHG mitigation needed to avert the worst impacts of climate change, an unprecedented
investment of time, resources, and labor will be required across every sector of the economy. The International
Energy Agency estimated that annual investments in clean energy alone would need to reach $4 trillion by 2030
to meet next zero emissions targets. 110 These investments will help avoid some of the negative impacts of
climate change detailed in the previous section and also create an opportunity to reshape our state: to preserve
and care for our abundant natural resources, to create thousands of good-paying jobs in an inclusive clean
energy economy, to share more equitably the opportunities to create wealth in adaptation, and to lead by
example for other states and communities.
This section will identify a few key areas of opportunity for Louisiana as it begins to take action to reduce the
GHG emissions fueling global climate change.

REDUCING NET GHG EMISSIONS
Governor Edwards’ Executive Order sets specific, ambitious goals for GHG emissions reduction for Louisiana. As
seen in Figure 16 below, the strategies and actions in this plan can reach net zero by 2050 with aggressive
and timely implementation, as well as support from the federal government.
The short-term goals set by Governor Edwards are more challenging to meet. Achieving 26-28% reduction of
2005 GHG emissions by 2025 may have required past action. Similarly, while reaching the interim 2030 goal of
40-50% reduction will be difficult, accelerated effort in implementing strategies and actions, combined with nearterm federal support, can get Louisiana close to this goal.
Louisiana’s modeled pathway (Figure 16) shows the relative emissions reduction potential by EPS policies. Some
policies are grouped together, such as in “Other Industry and Electricity Policies,” which includes industrial energy
efficiency standards, for example. The categories of “Buildings and Vehicles,” “Methane Capture and
Destruction,” and “Forestry Policies” are similarly groupings of EPS tool policies. A full breakdown is available in
the Water Institute’s Technical Memorandum, available online.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

32

Louisiana’s Modeled Pathway to Net Zero by 2050

FIGURE 16. GHG EMI SSIONS FOR LOU ISIANA, 202 0- 205 0. T HE MODELLED GHG EMI SSIONS REDUCT IONS
ARE BASED ON THE STRATEGIE S AND ACT IONS WITHIN THIS PLAN. TWO AREA S OF GHG EMISSION
REDUCT ION OUTSIDE T HE MODEL ARE AL SO PROVI DED. INTERIM ( 2030) AND NET ZERO (2050) G OALS ARE
INDICATED. T HE BUSINESS AS USUAL UNCERT AINTY RANGE ( GREY) IS ALSO P ROVI DED FO R COMPARISON.

Three key policy pillars are needed for Louisiana to achieve net zero by 2050: renewable electricity
generation, industrial electrification, and industrial fuel switching to low- and no-carbon hydrogen (Figure
17). Because two thirds of the state’s emissions come from the industrial sector, abating these
emissions through electrification is one of the strongest and most necessary actions for Louisiana.
However, industrial facilities use enormous amounts of energy, and switching to electricity will increase the
demand for electricity accordingly. If that electricity provided to newly electrified facilities is produced using
fossil fuels, then the overall emissions are unchanged. Similarly, if industrial facilities can move their high-heat
processes to hydrogen fuel, that hydrogen should be produced with no or minimal carbon emissions for the
best chance at achieving net zero. If low- and no-carbon hydrogen is produced with electrolysis, the source
of the electricity powering the production must be considered. All three of these challenge areas must be
addressed in coordination with each other for maximum benefit, utilizing multiple policy mechanisms to
accelerate implementation. If fully implemented, actions and strategies in this plan will set up the
environment where Louisiana can pursue and coordinate implementation in all three areas, with potential to
utilize federal policy pushes as well, such as the U.S. Department of Energy’s Hydrogen Earthshot, aiming
to achieve $1 per kilogram low- and no-carbon hydrogen in one decade.111

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

33

Louisiana’s Key Climate Policy Pillars

FIGURE 17: L OU ISIANA' S T HREE CLIMATE POLICY PILLARS MUST B E IMPLEMENTED T OGETHER T O REACH NET
ZERO.

M O D EL I N G A P P RO ACH AN D L I M I T AT I O N S
In the fall and winter of 2021, draft versions of the set of strategies and actions (called a “portfolio”) in this plan
were modeled using the Louisiana EPS tool. While many policy-specific actions were either not able to be
modeled or were not exact matches for the policies available in EPS, this tool provided insights into gaps in the
portfolio and the timing of when high impact actions need to be pursued over the next 30 years. While the EPS
tool, like any policy model, is inherently limited and cannot dictate how to implement these policies in a local
context, it can and did help test approaches to emissions reduction. Through these modeling insights and other
inputs mentioned in the Planning Process, the portfolio was revised and remodeled in an iterative process of
policymaking. This finalized portfolio of strategies and actions embodies the lessons learned from two rounds of
analysis in the EPS tool and two comment periods. For a full accounting of the consequence analyses and model
settings used, please see the technical memoranda published by the Water Institute.
While no modeling can predict the future, particularly as far out as 2050, there are several specific uncertainties
worth noting. First, the EPS tool treats Louisiana like an island for modeling purposes. In reality, there will be
federal action on regulatory standards and other climate action, global changes in supply and demand of GHGintensive products, regional changes in electricity production and transmission partnerships, and more. There
are many ways in which these shifts alone could result in a much more aggressive trajectory for Louisiana’s
emissions than what is possible to be modeled in the Louisiana EPS. The potential for reduced emissions from
these federal actions is represented in Figure 16 by the dotted pink line.
Second, the EPS tool does not provide the needed granularity to determine the capacity of natural lands and
wetlands to serve as carbon sinks, as it is primarily an energy demand model. Louisiana’s abundant natural
lands and wetlands are important not only for carbon sequestration, but also for maintaining cultural heritage,
coastal and agricultural economies, and reducing flood risk. These wetlands and natural lands have a strong

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

34

potential to sequester more carbon than can be modeled in the EPS tool, and are represented by the dotted
purple line.
Finally, implementation of the strategies and actions of this plan can provide variable results for Louisiana and
determine the state’s ability to attain net zero by 2050. Louisiana must act aggressively to realize the emissions
reduction potential shown in Figure 16 above and must quickly accelerate high-impact actions that can be
implemented immediately. If coordination and cooperation are high, emissions could be reduced faster and more
effectively. But if timelines are extended, standards are weakened, or enforcement is lacking, Louisiana’s
emissions trajectory will differ from the modeling presented above.
As technological advances are made and research gaps are closed with actionable science, Louisiana will be
able to adaptively manage this plan to further pursue actions that are working to reduce emissions. The
uncertainty found in the modeling should not be a deterrent, but rather a call to action, to cooperatively and
aggressively implement the actions and strategies in this plan, and adaptively manage the plan for future
reductions in emissions.

IMPROVING HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE FOR RESIDENTS
AND COMMUNITIES
The public health impacts associated with GHG emissions are tremendously costly for Louisiana in terms of
lives and dollars, but addressing emissions can have short- and long-term benefits for human health and reduce
risks brought on by climate change. 112 Similarly, the previous section discussed other detrimental factors of
climate change on public health, but mitigation action can reduce those detrimental outcomes while producing
new opportunities to improve people’s lives. These issues were captured by the Task Force in three fundamental
objectives related to maximizing the quality of and access to essential goods, services and infrastructure;
improving health and safety; and preserving cultural heritage.
Multiple strategies and actions in Louisiana’s Climate Plan contribute to neutral, positive, or very positive
outcomes for public health and quality of life. As the modeling results from the Louisiana EPS tool show, the
Climate Action Plan can be expected to prevent over 1,800 premature deaths and nearly 55,000 asthma
attacks per year. These estimated improvements to public health can be attributed to actions in this plan related
to pollution reduction, such as reducing the combustion of fossil fuels in the generation of electricity, at
manufacturing facilities, and in transportation. As activities relying on the combustion of fossil fuels decrease,
overall air quality improves, but the improvements are most pronounced in communities nearest to where the
emissions originate. Addressing methane emissions can produce its own benefits to health, and utilizing CCUS
requires the use of systems that are designed to remove sulfur dioxide, particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide,
sulfur trioxide, and many metals from the CO2e stream.113 These findings are supported by the 2018
National Climate Assessment that found many of the processes that produce GHG emissions also release
hundreds of other air pollutants that can cause serious illness and premature death. Because of this
relationship, cutting GHG emissions to reduce the impacts of climate change can also mitigate
other harmful impacts on human health.114
Other climate actions can indirectly benefit public health and quality of life. For example, monitoring programs
for GHG emissions can be used to track other types of pollutants; enhancing the safe access to transportation
options promotes exercise and improved health; and both rural and urban users have greater access to goods
and services when public transport services improve. Further, reducing electric utility costs through energy

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

35

efficiency improvements can have measurable benefits to a family’s bottom line as can the successful
development of a more inclusive and resilient economy.

CREATING A MORE EQUITABLE SOCIETY
In Louisiana and around the world, climate change and GHG emissions disproportionately impact low-income,
Black, and Indigenous communities. These communities are the least responsible for emissions but bear
the highest costs in health and environmental degradation. In addition to their own inherent value as people of
the state of Louisiana and the price they have paid through past inequities, these communities hold
tremendous knowledge of the state’s lands, waters, wildlife, and environment and are needed leaders in the
implementation of GHG-reducing actions. Representation and process integration are the foundation for
equitable opportunity and outcomes. From the start of the Climate Action Plan development process, the Task
Force and supporting members were chosen with this reality in mind, and open discussion of equity
considerations were fostered during public meetings. In addition, an equity advisory group was formed to
specifically consider the potential outcomes of policy proposals for advancing or negating progress toward a
more equitable society. The equity advisory group developed a definition of climate equity and evaluated the
potential impact of climate actions on the three equity-centered fundamental objectives aimed at reducing
disparities, addressing historic and structural inequities, and increasing participation for Black, lowincome, historically marginalized, and Indigenous peoples across Louisiana.
With these objectives as guideposts, the Task Force developed strategies and actions with climate equity at the
forefront. Representation and transparent processes must be continued to help inform, design, and implement
climate actions that offer tangible benefits to under-resourced communities and lead the vision and work of
repairing our environment and building an equitable and sustainable clean energy future. Importantly, this
work also produces positive benefits for everyone, including communities that have been historically
marginalized. For example, modernizing public transit and providing greater access to broadband internet
can provide particular tangible benefits to underserved communities. Further, utilizing traditional
ecological knowledge to conserve and restore the environment is an avenue for shared knowledge and benefit
across communities.
Without intentional policy design, however, Louisiana’s actions to build a new, low-carbon economy will
reinforce and replicate the stratification and divisions present today. Addressing these present and
future burdens experienced by people of color, particularly Black and Indigenous peoples, must recognize the
historical systems of discrimination and oppression that directly and indirectly contribute to these social
vulnerabilities, to environmental hazards, and climate change. For example, addressing industrial GHG
emissions in Louisiana’s industrial corridor along the Mississippi River should recognize the
history of enslavement and disenfranchisement of Black people and the prior land use serving as
plantations. Effective policymaking should further seek opportunities to remedy disproportionate impacts
of environmental and climate hazards on historically marginalized peoples and communities.
While reducing GHG emissions can create positive co-benefits for historically marginalized communities,
access to these technologies or programs is of critical importance. Vastly expanding distributed solar energy or
building the infrastructure for alternative vehicles presents a tremendous opportunity to utilize local,
minority-owned businesses and employ disadvantaged workers, but these goals must be established
and tracked in implementation. Similarly, distributed renewable energy generation provides customers with
greater control over their energy supply, can reduce energy costs, and can promote opportunities to
establish community solar access. Further, careful design and execution of energy efficiency, urban green
space, and increased outdoor access can provide relief from the urban heat island effect. This intentionality
can also ensure other actions reach the most in-need and historically marginalized residents first.
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

36

By deliberately considering climate equity at the forefront, Louisiana’s Climate Action Plan aims to ensure that
the costs of mitigation or adaptation actions do not to fall unequally on the already disadvantaged, and that
the opportunity to advance climate mitigation and adaptation addresses long-standing inequities while
promoting new opportunities for a more inclusive, low-carbon economy in the future.

STRENGTHENING THE ECONOMY AND WORKFORCE
Much of the United States and the world are moving towards carbon neutrality, which will affect Louisiana’s
economy. This transition to a low-carbon economy creates the need for rapid new developments in technology
and carbon-reduction solutions, but there is clear demand and willingness to make significant investments in
low- and no-carbon energy and industry. Although the global transition to a low-carbon economy will be
challenging for Louisiana given the large role carbon-intensive industries have played historically for the state,
careful action now can position Louisiana to capitalize on these new investment and economic opportunities.
The Climate Action Plan recognizes this reality and gives Louisiana the chance to address challenges and
opportunities of a changing economy head on, while growing new businesses and industries to meet the
needs of a global low-carbon economy.
The Task Force has held up economic growth and support for Louisiana workers as two fundamental objectives
in reducing Louisiana GHG emissions. In recent decades, Louisiana has found economic benefits from
aggressively taking action against the coastal crisis.115 Just as investment in the state’s coastal program
has created expertise for Louisiana businesses to share around the world, state investment and leadership
in the work of climate mitigation could also provide significant economic opportunities for the people of the
state. Prestigious international studies have indicated that creating and mobilizing new technologies in clean
energy, batteries, hydrogen electrolysis, carbon capture, and direct air capture will create millions of new jobs
globally.116 And when assessing policies associated with attaining net zero for Louisiana in the EPS tool,
significant investments in new hydrogen equipment, solar projects, electric vehicle chargers, and other
infrastructure are estimated to produce around 111,000 jobs in 2030 and 263,000 jobs in 2050.117
One area of considerable job growth and economic opportunity is renewable energy, which the Climate Action
Plan is designed to catalyze with actions that promote job training and investment that can overall benefit the
workforce. A dramatic drop in costs for solar energy and onshore wind has urged investment in renewable power
across the country. Interest in solar development is growing inside the state118 and Louisiana is working with
the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) to complete the necessary steps to hold a lease sale in the
Gulf of Mexico for offshore wind power production. According to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
Louisiana ranks as the fourth highest state in the nation for offshore wind technical potential,119 with potential
for a single offshore wind project to create 4,470 construction jobs and 150 full-time operations jobs.120 In
addition to offshore wind deployment, Louisiana is well positioned to be a manufacturing and servicing hub
for offshore wind across the U.S. In fact, Louisiana companies were integral in the design, fabrication, and
construction of the nation’s first commercial offshore wind farm in Block Island, Rhode Island.121
The Climate Action Plan is also designed to build on and expand its traditional industrial and manufacturing
strengths while providing lower-carbon products and processes that can better meet changing demands of
the market. In 2021 alone, major investments have been planned for the state that consist of new or
expanded facilities for production of biofuels, renewable diesel, and hydrogen and liquefied natural gas
with carbon capture.122
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

37

This slate of announcements verifies studies and models showing the economic potential associated with this
type of investment for Louisiana. EPS tool analysis indicates that the highest potential for job creation in
Louisiana will be driven by industrial fuel switching.123 A study by the Rhodium Group estimates that jobs in
Louisiana associated with capital investments in carbon capture could produce between 2,700 and 4,000
total jobs per year on average over the next fifteen years and an additional 1,700 to 2,500 jobs per year to
operate and complete retrofits. 124 Not only do these actions create jobs through retrofitting and new
facilities construction, but they also help pilot technologies and approaches that can be used on similar
facilities around the country and the world with Louisiana experience at the center.
The Climate Action Plan also supports activities like the plugging of orphaned wells and addressing methane
leakage that can reduce economic losses for companies while creating jobs and preventing the release of
GHGs.125 Procurement changes in Louisiana to preference low-carbon materials also create demand for lowcarbon products that encourage and reward changes to manufacturing processes and create a market for
emerging products. Procurement changes also support the production of Louisiana agriculture and
forestry products.
Other actions also encourage investment and economic opportunities more broadly. Improvements to public
transportation for urban and rural residents, rail connections between major cities, and the expansion of
broadband internet access across the state all reduce GHG emissions while connecting workers to opportunities,
promoting economic activity and commerce, and bringing greater access to goods and services.
Leaders and new partnerships are already laying the groundwork for an inclusive, low-carbon economy. In
December, 2021, The Greater New Orleans Development Foundation received a competitive $500,000
grant from the U.S. Economic Development Administration’s Build Back Better Regional Challenge to develop a
green hydrogen energy cluster to decarbonize the south Louisiana industrial corridor. Partnering across
government, academic institutions, businesses, nonprofits, and economic development organizations, the
H2theFuture plan includes specialized worker training, infrastructure investment in green hydrogen, CCUS,
naval engineering, and the creation of a clean energy research center and startup incubator. This proposal also
seeks to provide benefits to energy workers, rural communities, and historically marginalized populations while
protecting the environment and transforming the economy.126

CONSERVING NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT

RESOURCES & PROTECTING THE

Reduction of net GHG emissions can provide numerous environmental benefits, including both direct benefits
through natural areas that sequester carbon and indirect benefits realized through air quality improvement.
According to the 2021 GHG Inventory, Louisiana’s forested areas “are a considerable carbon sink” with
wetlands – assessed for the first time in this inventory – also supporting carbon sequestration. Despite
severe losses to wetland areas caused by the 2005 hurricane season, Louisiana’s land-based carbon
sequestration has increased since 2012, contributing to an annual reduction of 35 MMT CO2e, which is
comparable to the entire power generation sector.127
Natural lands and wetlands are much more than a carbon sink. They are part of the state’s cultural
heritage, particularly for Indigenous communities, so efforts to preserve natural lands produce benefits
across the Task Force’s fundamental objectives. Broad support for the conservation of Louisiana’s
natural resources and environmental protection was expressed across the wide array of stakeholders in
Louisiana’s climate planning process.
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

38

Strategies and actions addressing land use and development can preserve habitats and open spaces while
also supporting floodplain management, water quality improvements, healthier lifestyles, and higher quality of
life. Agricultural best practices can reduce nutrient runoff, improve water quality, and lead to lower
incidences of harmful algal blooms. They can yield healthier soils, greater sustainability, and higher
productivity for local ecosystems and provide additional benefits to public health and safety. Protecting
and restoring coastal ecosystems can further support adaptation efforts by enhancing community resilience
to the threats of sea level rise and severe storms. Preserving the coast also helps protect many significant
economic engines for Louisiana including waterborne commerce, commercial fishing, energy production and
distribution, and more. Healthy ecosystems also support fishing and hunting resources that are available to all
but can be particularly important for some Indigenous communities. Lastly, when strategic investments in green
infrastructure and the urban tree canopy are deployed, the urban heat island effect can be reduced, providing
access to green space and lowering energy demand.

ADAPTING TO A CHANGING CLIMATE
Climate adaptation is an immediate need in Louisiana. Impacts from climate change are already being felt
across our state with the most dramatic occurring along our coast. According to the 2021 IPCC report,
many of these changes are already irreversible for the foreseeable future.128 Taking immediate steps to reduce
GHG emissions is a crucial step to avoiding even more severe adaptation challenges in the coming decades.
When possible, these mitigation steps can also be used to build resilience against current and future
challenges. Two fundamental objectives of the Task Force focus on adapting to a changing climate by
increasing the resilience of the built and the natural environments, as well as communities, to the impacts of
climate change.
In many cases, efforts to reduce GHG emissions in this plan and adaptation measures go hand-in-hand. This
plan supports enhanced access to distributed solar resources, energy storage, the development of
microgrids, and improvements to energy efficiency that can all promote community resilience. Improving
energy efficiency reduces energy demand and emissions and can also make way for other gains that improve
resilience to extreme weather events. In New Orleans, the state’s first net-zero apartment complex features
energy efficiency and solar power that help offset costs for the building’s residents and battery storage that
provided power during Hurricane Zeta, winter storm Uri, and in the aftermath of Hurricane Ida.129 Hurricane Ida
has also spawned other efforts to provide renewable energy and storage to communities most impacted by the
hurricane specifically in ways that also support culture, quality of life, and community.130
The Climate Action Plan also calls for coordinated land use planning to reduce sprawl and support healthy and
resilient communities. Smart land use planning, compact development, and model ordinances, supported by a
statewide, coordinating authority, can help communities anticipate and reduce the potential for negative impacts
from extreme weather events. Finally, as seen in the previous section, restoring and protecting Louisiana’s
coastal wetlands both preserve valuable carbon sinks and maintain a natural buffer between the Gulf of Mexico,
tropical weather events, and communities.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

39

MANAGING FOR SHORT- AND LONG-TERM SUCCESS
For GHG emissions reductions to occur – and for any of the other benefits to the people of Louisiana to be
realized – the Climate Action Plan must be successful in the short- and long-term. In practice, that means that
the strategies and actions must be implemented in a timely fashion, effective at reducing GHG emissions,
adaptable to new technologies and approaches as they become available, and rooted in public trust for
sustained buy-in and support. In addition to integrating short- and long-term success into actions, two sections
of the portfolio, Collaboration and Partnerships to Ensure Successful Implementation and Accountability and
Adaptability to Ensure Lasting Success, are explicitly designed to advance these fundamental objectives.
Though this set of strategies and actions outlines a pathway to net zero, this effort requires decades of action
and is highly dependent on maximizing these short- and long-term objectives. The portfolio includes immediate
actions to build public trust and address sectors that account for a large fraction of Louisiana’s emissions,
such as energy efficiency and conservation. These actions are paired with longer-term actions, such as atscale deployment of green hydrogen, to set long-term ambition.
Accountability and transparency, alongside long-term durability and effectiveness, are also vital for building
public confidence in the Climate Action Plan. For this reason, GHG monitoring actions and regular plan updates
are explicitly called out to ensure that actions and strategies can be adjusted as needed if they are not
producing the expected outcomes or as new technology is understood to catalyze further success.
Finally, the Climate Action Plan was developed recognizing that partnerships and collaboration are critical
for short- and long-term success as well as for enabling positive change for the people, economy, and
environment of Louisiana. For example, some actions enable education, research, and private sector innovation
to attain strategies that require new technology development and deployment at scale. Additionally, where
possible, actions highlight opportunities for federal partnerships and funding, particularly through the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021. Deliberate alignment across state agencies, local
governments, and communities can ensure new policies, incentives, and regulations work together and are
as effective as possible at reducing net GHGs and at providing co-benefits.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

40

Climate
Strategies
and Actions
Meeting the scale of the challenge to reduce Louisiana’s GHG emissions to net zero by 2050,
avoid the worst impacts of climate change, and realize social, economic, environmental,
equity, and resilience co-benefits for the state requires immediate, aggressive, and
comprehensive action. This plan consists of 28 strategies (high-level approaches) and 84
actions (practical and implementable policy steps) focused on the following areas critical to
a decarbonized future for Louisiana:

• Clean Energy Transition
• Industrial Decarbonization
• Actively Managed Methane Emissions
• Transportation, Development, and the Built Environment
• Natural and Working Lands and Wetlands
• An Inclusive, Low-Carbon Economy
• Collaboration and Partnership to Ensure Successful Implementation
• Accountability and Adaptability to Ensure Lasting Success

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

41

The strategies and actions detailed in the following section were developed with expert guidance from sector
committees, as well as ideas and recommendations shared by Task Force and advisory group members and the
public. This portfolio of strategies and actions has undergone rigorous evaluation and iterative improvement –
including two-rounds of analysis of anticipated GHG emissions reductions using the EPS tool, a survey to elicit
the expertise of advisory group members in forecasting the anticipated impacts to the other fundamental
objectives, and multiple opportunities for review and comment by the Task Force and the public. (See “Planning
Timeline” for more detail.)
Reaching net zero will require concrete action to reduce GHG emissions across all sectors of Louisiana’s
economy. However, the overwhelming contribution of emissions from the industrial sector, which accounts for
66% of overall state emissions, provides a unique challenge and requires Louisiana to chart a path forward that
looks different in many ways from other states.
Louisiana’s ultimate success will hinge upon a holistic and coordinated approach to these three interconnected
policy pillars: renewable electricity generation, industrial electrification, and industrial fuel switching to lowand no-carbon hydrogen (Figure 17). Effectively reducing industrial emissions will require collaboration,
investment, appropriate sequencing, and expedient implementation of Clean Energy Transition and Industrial
Decarbonization actions. The imperative of implementing those high-impact actions does not take away from
actions in other sections of the plan, which also require immediate implementation to realize emission
reductions and other benefits for Louisiana.
Louisiana can attain net zero GHG emissions by 2050 by fully and aggressively implementing the strategies
and actions set forth in this plan. Actions focused on accountability will ensure responsible, transparent, and
timely implementation. Actions focused on adaptive management will ensure that ongoing implementation of
this Climate Action Plan and subsequent iterations of the plan are well-informed by emerging data and
technologies, forthcoming understanding of impacts, and innovation in and implementation of monitoring. An
implementation matrix (Table 2) is included following the full list of strategies and actions.
The strategies and actions in this plan have been iteratively crafted and improved upon in an effort to balance
the sometimes-diverging priorities and perspective of Task Force members and stakeholders while also
achieving the scale and ambition to reach net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 in a manner that provides benefits
for Louisiana’s people, economy, and environment. Reaching consensus of Task Force members on an
ambitious
thatand
can
achieve theplan
vision
goals set forth by Governor Edwards was a sought-after priority. However, the Task
Force has also recognized the need to enable an individual member to state their formal dissent to a specific
action within this plan, while still supporting the plan overall. Where there is formal dissent to a specific action,
a summary
offor dissent along with the name(s) of dissenting Task Force members are included below the action.
the
reason(s)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

42

Clean Energy
Transition
Electricity is the backbone of the economy and a requirement for high
quality of life – powering, heating, and cooling homes, businesses,
information systems, infrastructure, and industrial facilities of every
size. As the world moves to reduce GHG emissions from the economy,
clean and reliable electricity will become even more important
as the built environment, transportation systems, and large industrial
users all move away from the combustion of fossil fuels and onto the
electric grid. To make the most of this transition while meeting GHG
reduction goals and the fundamental objectives, Louisiana should
support this transition by working to ensure that the electricity
supplying all of these activities is clean. This section contains two
major strategies: one targeting the grid and the utilities and the other
targeting end users.
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

• STRATEGY 1: Shift towards a
clean, renewable, and
resilient power grid
• STRATEGY 2: Increase access
to and deployment of
distributed energy resources

43

STRATEGY 1. Shift towards a clean, renewable, and resilient power grid
The transformation of our electric grid to clean and renewable energy sources is a fundamental
building block for meeting Louisiana’s climate action goals. Here, “clean” is defined as energy
generation that results in emission of little to zero GHGs (e.g., nuclear, biowaste, and natural gas with
carbon capture) and “renewable” is defined as naturally replenishing energy sources with zero GHG
emissions (e.g., solar, wind, hydropower, and geothermal). As we shift energy sources to electricity
used by Louisiana’s industries, vehicles, buildings, and more, overall demand for electricity will
increase, and the source of that electricity becomes increasingly important. Actions under
this strategy are directed at the electric grid and power generation facilities, including the
utilities that aim to reliably meet the rapidly increasing demands of an electrified economy.
Here, actions are aimed at increasing clean and renewable sources of power generation, while
also increasing the reliability and resilience of the electric grid.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Public Health: Generating electricity from increasingly renewable sources can improve air quality and reduce negative
public health impacts to communities living near power plants.

•

Economy and Jobs: Investment in local renewable power production can lead to the creation of new jobs and
economic opportunity for Louisianans, particularly with accompanying strategies to support local job training and
economic development.

•

Community Resilience: Updating and modernizing the electric grid may reduce downtime due to weather or other
disruptions, thus supporting communities by improving electric grid dependability.

ACTION 1.1 Adopt a Renewable and Clean Portfolio Standard and create a statewide market for
Renewable Energy Certificates
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities

Establish a RCPS

100% renewable or clean by 2035, at
least 80% from renewable sources

A Renewable and Clean Portfolio Standard (RCPS) is a law or regulation that reduces the GHG emissions associated with
electricity generation. Louisiana’s RCPS would require electricity used in the state to be generated from an increasing
percentage of renewable or clean sources with clear guidelines for how combined heat and power generation should be
considered. To qualify as clean energy, power generation facilities reliant on carbon capture technology should capture
at least 90% of facility emissions, which is currently a typical target for CCS projects, but the capture efficiency
requirement should increase as the technology improves and costs decline over time. Louisiana’s RCPS should align with
proposed federal requirements that 100% of electricity generation be derived from renewable or clean resources by
2035, with at least 80% of total generation from renewable sources by 2050. The RCPS should also encourage
improvements in efficiency, be flexible enough to account for disruptions like major hurricanes, and not overburden
customers with additional costs or reduced reliability, while still aggressively pursuing reductions in GHG emissions. To
reduce generation from unabated natural gas peaker plants, demand response should also be included as a mechanism
to achieve targets.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

44

To support the RCPS, Louisiana should also establish a statewide market or join an existing market for Renewable Energy
Certificates (RECs) available to electric utilities, which are market-based instruments that represent the property rights
to the environmental, social, and other non-power attributes of renewable electricity generation. RECs play an important
role in accounting, tracking, and assigning ownership to renewable electricity generation and use. The REC value and
market would be underpinned by requiring utilities to purchase RECs as an alternate mechanism for meeting the RCPS.
This action proposes engagement of the Louisiana Public Service Commission (PSC), utilities, and stakeholders to
develop and implement a RCPS and a statewide market for RECs. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 16, 56, 119, 145,
152, 162, 172)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action, with one opposition to the inclusion of 20% non-renewable
clean power in the RCPS and one opposition to the 20% limitation of non-renewable clean power in the RCPS.
DISSENTERS: Pichon Battle, Bowser.

ACTION 1.2 Improve electric generation resource planning and procurement to streamline the
retirement and replacement of energy resources
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities / Governor’s Office

Engage in Entergy Louisiana, LLC and
Cleco Power LLC IRP Process in 2022

Encourage generation of renewable
power

Integrated Resource Plans, or IRPs, are how utilities plan for future electric generation needs. IRPs identify future needs
and different types of resources a utility can use to reliably serve customers in Louisiana. Over the next decade,
Louisiana’s electric utilities will be undergoing a rapid transition from predominantly fossil fuel generation to a low-carbon
power generation mix driven in large part by deploying more renewable resources, while making other investments to
ensure grid reliability. Resource management and planning should also consider that all assets, some of which have 30year lifespans, will likely need to be low- or no-carbon by 2050, further emphasizing the
*Retirement of the Dolet
importance of planning now. Where appropriate, the electric utility industry should also
Hills Power Station
complement planning for large base load power stations with smaller, more distributed
generation facilities strategically located to enhance grid reliability and achieve When the Dolet Hills power
station, Louisiana’s first coalemissions reductions.* This action proposes working with the PSC to evolve the IRP
fired power plant, was closed
five years ahead of schedule
and regulatory process to: 1) accommodate the dynamic nature of the energy transition;
in December 2021. The
2) evaluate the costs and benefits of operating older generation facilities (including
retirement was projected to
impacts to affordability); 3) examine the risk of early retirement or substantial
save
utility
customers
between $9 and $15 each
retrofitting of new fossil fuel-based generation facilities due to future federal climate
month because of the lower
action; 4) expedite renewable energy procurement in a way that will improve
cost of more efficient and
competition, reduce ratepayer costs, and improve Louisiana’s air quality, and (5) better
cleaner power generation that
would take its place.
incorporate distributed energy resources. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 112,
114, 116, 117)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, citing disagreement with the inclusion of “low-carbon power
generation” and subsequent perpetuation of fossil fuel use and deployment of CCUS. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

45

ACTION 1.3 Strategically plan for the development of offshore wind power
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities / industry / LED / DNR
/ universities

Prioritize offshore wind strategic
planning for outreach, workforce. and
impacts assessments

5 gigawatts of offshore wind
generation by 2035

Given the availability of wind power as a potential energy resource from the Gulf of Mexico, Louisiana’s advantage as a
strong offshore energy producing state, and the economic development opportunity that wind power presents, Louisiana
should continue collaboration across sectors and develop plans for the accelerated implementation of offshore wind
power generation. This action proposes enactment of an offshore wind power generation goal of 5 gigawatts by 2035.
This goal requires strategic collaboration across Louisiana state agencies and the federal government,
transmission planning agencies, energy regulators, utilities, and the private sector to take additional steps to
advance the development of offshore wind power generation. To spur large-scale, responsible development of this
energy resource, efforts should prioritize early and repeated stakeholder outreach, strategic planning for anticipated
transmission and workforce needs, and improving the understanding of potential environmental and social impacts
and opportunities to avoid, address, or capitalize on them. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 61, 101)

ACTION 1.4 Establish utility green tariffs
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities

Establish tariff offerings for
renewable and clean power

Encourage purchasing of renewable
power

Green tariffs are optional programs offered by utilities that allow customers to purchase renewable or clean power from
specific projects through a special utility tariff rate (fee structure). Opting to pay a green tariff for renewable or clean
energy helps customers meet sustainability targets and helps promote the development of additional renewable or clean
energy generation projects sooner. To maximize market participation and consumer choice, a green tariff program should
provide separate renewable power and clean power tariff options. This action would include utilities working with the
PSC to establish tariff offerings for renewable and/or clean power for residential, commercial, industrial, non-profit, and
governmental customers through a Utility Green Tariffs program. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 111, 118, 175)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, citing concern over the inclusion of non-renewable clean
energy and subsequent perpetuation of fossil fuel use and deployment of CCUS. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

46

ACTION 1.5 Explore the role of Power Purchase Agreements and deregulating power generation in the
energy transition
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities / industry

Understand implications of
deregulated power generation

Encourage generation of renewable
power

Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are long-term contracts between customers and renewable energy developers that
allow the purchase of renewable energy at certain volumes and prices. PPAs connect renewable energy developers, who
design, permit, finance, install, operate, maintain, and own a renewable energy project with an electricity customer(s).
Basic co-benefits of PPAs are two-fold: 1) customers that enter PPAs can avoid the up-front capital costs of installing a
renewable energy system while still increasing access to renewable power; and 2) developers get revenue certainty that
helps to finance the renewable energy project. This action requests the PSC to further review the benefits and costs of
allowing PPAs and deregulated power generation as mechanisms to efficiently and expeditiously add renewable energy
generation to the grid and make no-carbon electricity more accessible to industrial facilities. Following this review, the
PSC should understand and consider potential market-based mechanisms for effective competition in a deregulated
environment. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 11, 47, 144)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action. One member cited concerns about electric grid reliability
in a deregulated environment. The other member supported this action but objected to limiting PPAs to renewable
power and not including non-renewable clean power generation. DISSENTERS: Bourg, Bowser.

ACTION 1.6 Develop a regional long-range transmission infrastructure plan to meet Louisiana’s
transmission goal
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities / MISO / SPP / DNR

Assess infrastructure needs across
the state to plan for renewable
connectivity

30% increase in grid infrastructure by
2030 and 100% increase by 2050

Long-range transmission planning, which seeks to optimize regional transmission infrastructure investments over a 20to-30-year planning horizon, ensures that the electric grid can accommodate the changes occurring in the energy sector
as Louisiana transitions to lower GHG-emitting sources (e.g., electrification, the growth of distributed generation, the
retirement of aging or inefficient generation, addition of offshore wind, development of
reliable and affordable energy storage) and strives to maintain affordability and reliable
*Regional Transmission
service during extreme weather events. Stronger regional transmission networks also
Mechanisms
allow for the optimized flow of power to and from producers within regions. The gap
Louisiana is an active participant
between today’s renewable electricity generation and availability and targets for 2035
in two regional transmission
highlights the importance of regional transmission infrastructure and planning. This
organizations, the Midcontinent
action recommends the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Energy Office join with Independent System Operator
(MISO) and the Southwest Power
the PSC, MISO, and SPP* to develop a strategic plan for the buildout of Louisiana’s Pool (SPP), through the PSC,
where states collaborate on and
grid and transmission infrastructure to meet a near-term goal of a 30% increase of
share infrastructure to support
capacity in MW-miles by 2030 and a long-term goal of 100% increase of capacity in
regional transmission.
MW-miles by 2050. This action should begin in the short-term with an understanding

Louis i an a Cl imate Act ion P l an, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

47

of where and how much electricity is most needed across the state, with particular attention to industrial clusters and
power facilities. From this baseline, the PSC, MISO, and SPP can plan for and ensure connectivity across the MISO and
SPP infrastructure that supports Louisiana’s renewable power needs, emphasized in the “Clean Energy Transition” and
“Industrial Decarbonization” Sections. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 122, 123, 165)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, expressing concern that a specific transmission expansion
goal is a premature and should be set after further study. DISSENTER: Bowser.

ACTION 1.7 Adopt and develop measures to meet an energy storage target
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities / DNR Office of Energy

Solicit funds for energy storage pilot
projects

1000 megawatts of energy storage by
2030

Energy storage is a necessary component of Louisiana’s energy transition infrastructure to ensure grid reliability and
resilience and to help meet energy demand. Storage enables larger quantities of and greater reliance on renewable
energy sources by reducing the intermittency problems of solar and wind power generation. Storage reserves electricity
generated by renewables when the sun is shining or wind is blowing to be “dispatched” later when those sources are not
producing. Many states, including Virginia and Nevada, have enacted energy storage targets and a streamlined
regulatory environment that incentivize energy storage. This action proposes the PSC evaluate the role that energy
storage can play in increasing reliability and resilience and enabling the deployment of renewable energy. This
action proposes working with utilities and DNR’s State Energy Office to develop energy storage pilot projects and
consider a goal of 1000 megawatts by 2030 and setting a higher target for 2050 to ensure continued progress
towards a reliable, clean power grid. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 174)

ACTION 1.8 Publish “climate rankings” for electric utilities within the statewide GHG monitoring
program to increase public awareness, transparency, and accountability
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / utilities / DEQ

Assess gaps and synthesize existing
data on generation

Encourage generation of renewable
power

Customers of electric utilities should have easy, understandable access to information about where and how their
electricity is produced and how the mixture of energy production sources changes over time. This action proposes
engaging with the PSC, regional transmission organizations, the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), and utilities
to develop a regularly updated "report card” that produces valid data on the diversity of a utility’s generation portfolio.
This should include load, mixture of energy production sources, and renewables forecasting, as well as carbon dioxide
(CO2) and other emissions, to incorporate into DEQ’s statewide GHG monitoring program. Much of this data is available,
so actions to compile and synthesize data should begin immediately, noting any gaps in monitoring data and capacity.
DEQ should work with utilities to fill data gaps and ensure the report card is comprehensive. Updates to this report card
should be completed every year to incentivize, track, and recognize decarbonization progress by utilities. In the medium
and long term, a climate scorecard should be developed to compare data and trends across utilities around the state
and the nation, develop decarbonization challenges across utilities, and promote leadership within the state. (Associated
Submitted Action Proposals: 108, 115)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

48

STRATEGY 2. Increase access to and deployment of distributed energy resources
In addition to utility-scale actions, investments in distributed renewable resources—local generation
of electricity at or near where it will be used—can accelerate the deployment of renewable
technologies and projects in Louisiana. Actions under this strategy provide a range of mechanisms
to support more affordable access to and financing for distributed renewable resources for
residential, community-based, commercial, institutional, and industrial consumers.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Economy and Jobs: Investments in distributed renewable projects can support the growth of local businesses
and jobs within the solar, wind, and other renewable industries in Louisiana.

•

Energy Affordability: Distributed renewable generation provides an opportunity for energy customers to control
their energy supply, reduce their energy costs, and in some cases profit from their surplus energy production.
Additional attention in policy design and implementation of actions will be necessary to ensure that programs
are accessible to low-income residents, including renters. Models like community-owned solar can expand
access to the benefits of distributed renewable projects for all users.

•

Community Resilience: Local renewable electricity generation, when combined with storage, can provide backup
power to local businesses, residents, and community facilities during a grid outage, such as after a storm. This
can ensure the continued provision of essential services to communities.

•

Protecting the Environment: Distributed energy generation reduces the power generation needed from largescale solar or wind farms, potentially reducing the amount of land (or offshore acreage) that would need to be
converted from natural areas.

ACTION 2.1 Authorize tax incentives for residential, commercial, and community-based renewable
energy installation and storage
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature

Reinstate incentives for renewable
installation and storage

Encourage purchasing of renewable
power

Financial incentives for renewable energy installation and storage at household and commercial scales, particularly solar
(electricity and water heating), are important for ensuring equitable access to renewable energy across Louisiana.
Similar tax incentives have been employed in the past, and this action would reinstate and update that program to
provide a tax rebate (e.g., 30% or number of kW installed) based on the cost of installation with a cap per household/
project and an annual budget limit for the state. The program would prioritize low-income households. This action would
also work to implement tax incentives or credits to promote and support community-owned solar installations.
Community solar refers to local solar facilities shared by multiple community subscribers who receive credit on their
electricity bills for their share of the power produced. The primary purpose of community solar is to allow members of a
community the opportunity to share the benefits of solar power even if they cannot or prefer not to install solar panels
on their property (e.g., renters or those with homes or roofs unsuitable for solar). If this action is implemented, it will be
important to ensure that this program is accessible for low- and moderate-income homeowners through mechanisms
such as “carve-outs,” availability for community solar and other non-ownership models, pairing with other incentives,
targeted messaging, and outreach. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 113, 147, 126)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

49

ACTION 2.2 Review net metering and crediting policies for on-site and community solar energy system
owners and participants
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC

Review net metering policies

Account for value of distributed solar
energy generation

Many on-site (e.g., rooftop) solar energy system owners produce more electricity than they consume. Billing mechanisms
can provide these customers with credit for the energy they generate or add to the grid. Virtual net metering applies
similarly to the electricity bills of subscribers of community solar projects. Net metering helps financially justify the cost
of solar energy system installation thereby increasing demand for solar energy and creating jobs for those in the solar
industry. In PSC jurisdictions, owners of systems installed prior to 2020 are grandfathered into a full retail credit netmetering schedule until the end of 2034, while owners of systems installed in or after 2020 only receive credit for the
utility’s “avoided cost” when selling excess energy back to the grid. This action proposes working with the PSC to review
its prior ruling on net metering for solar energy system owners and community solar participants to ensure customer rate
schedules are equitable while fully accounting for the value of the distributed solar energy generation. (Associated
Submitted Action Proposals: 57, 126, 164)

ACTION 2.3 Strategically foster the development of resilient microgrids and dispatchable batteries
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

FEMA / GOHSEP / Louisiana National
Guard

Plan and implement microgrids and
dispatchable battery units

Speed post-disaster recovery and
resilience

Microgrids are localized “islands” of electricity generation that can be isolated from the larger macrogrid to supply power.
Dispatchable battery units can likewise supply power in response to outages. With the ability to disconnect and operate
independently, microgrid systems can provide for grid resilience, mitigate disturbances by disasters, and allow for faster
system response and recovery. This action requires collaboration across the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), the Governor’s Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness (GOHSEP), Louisiana National Guard,
the PSC, and local stakeholders to plan for the deployment and implementation of microgrids and dispatchable battery
units for businesses and communities in order to build resilience against increasingly frequent disasters. With near-term
federal funding available through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, this action recommends immediate
implementation through pilot projects for strategic assets with a goal of broader deployment of microgrids and
dispatchable batteries or other energy storage devices to improve the resilience of at-risk communities over the longterm. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 176)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

50

ACTION 2.4 Evaluate an Emission Reduction Generation and Supply (ERGS) program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC

Determine best mechanisms for thirdparty generation to sell energy back
to the grid

Encourage generation of renewable
power

Maximizing the simultaneous cogeneration of electricity and heat from renewable sources at industrial facilities can
encourage more efficient onsite energy generation for large consumers, reduce energy waste, and lower the demand on
the electric grid. This cogeneration also has potential to provide energy for additional uses or users. This action
requests that the PSC evaluate the creation of an Emission Reduction Generation and Supply (ERGS) program
to further incentivize cogeneration. The proposed program would allow industry or other third-party energy generation
created from emission-reducing sources (e.g., CHP, battery storage, on-site renewable energy generation, waste-heat
generation) to be automatically sold back to the grid at retail rates on an as available basis without classifying the
energy resource owner as a regulated electric public utility. The program should evaluate making this cogenerated
power available to non-adjacent locations that are under common or affiliate ownership with the purchase of
transmission or distribution services from local utilities. This action would evaluate the benefits and costs of
incentivizing industrial customers to build or utilize larger-scale reduced-emissions energy resources by allowing
them to share the electricity produced. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 43, 52, 89, 124, 160)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action. One member cited concerns about electric grid reliability
in a deregulated environment. The other member supports the concept of an ERGS program but objects to the
possible exclusion of non-renewable clean power generation. DISSENTERS: Bourg, Bowser.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION

51

Industrial
Decarbonization

Industrial decarbonization refers to avoiding the combustion of
fossil fuels to reduce emissions from the industrial process
chain. Industry is Louisiana’s largest sector of emissions, and
facilities that have been permitted but not yet built could
potentially add 100MMT CO2e to industrial emissions if no
action is taken, making it critical to develop concrete steps
towards a less energy-intensive industry that partners with
industry in this transition. The industrial sector accounts for a
disproportionately large share of GHG emissions in Louisiana,
as compared to other states, due to demand for products
produced in Louisiana that are then exported and sold to the
rest of the nation and world. Many opportunities exist to
decarbonize this sector, which are possible through efficiency,
electrification, fuel switching, CCUS, and reduced carbon
intensity of materials, which is shown across all four strategies
of this section.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

•

STRATEGY 3: Monitor, inventory, certify, and
support industrial decarbonization

•

STRATEGY 4: Improve efficiencies in and
modernization of industrial processes and
facilities

•

STRATEGY 5: Accelerate industrial
electrification, switching to low- or no-carbon
fuels and low- or no-carbon feedstocks

•

STRATEGY 6: Promote reduced-carbon
materials

52

STRATEGY 3. Monitor, inventory, certify, and support industrial decarbonization
Industrial sector emissions are Louisiana’s largest contributing source of GHG emissions, accounting
for over 65% of total state GHG emissions in 2018 based on the 2021 Greenhouse Gas Inventory.
An accurate baseline understanding of Louisiana’s industrial emissions is a critical first step towards
measuring, certifying, supporting, and accounting for reductions from the industrial sector. Baseline
information, with robust and reliable monitoring efforts, will allow for comprehensive tracking of
Louisiana’s emissions across a diverse and complex industrial profile and ensure accountability and
enforcement for all reductions.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Public Confidence: Tracking and monitoring industrial emissions alongside transparent communication of
emissions reductions to the people of Louisiana are critical for ensuring confidence in this climate action plan.

•

Human and Environmental Health: Monitoring programs that track GHG emissions can also be used to monitor
other toxic and potentially hazardous emissions. Improving Louisiana’s understanding of all industrial emissions
will help inform and mitigate potential impacts to communities and the natural environment.

•

Maximizing Future Success: Monitoring and inventorying industrial emissions allows the efficacy and impacts of all
actions to reduce these emissions to be evaluated and improved as the plan is implemented over time.

ACTION 3.1 Require carbon intensity audits and bolster emissions reporting from industrial facilities to
be incorporated into the statewide GHG monitoring program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ / EPA / Industry

Accurately account for facility-level
emissions and product carbon
intensity

Provide facility-specific
accountability in emission reduction

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) currently administers a Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program, which
generally requires facilities that emit 25,000 tons of GHGs per year to report their emissions. To expand the baseline
reporting of current emissions on a facility-by-facility basis, this action proposes that DEQ work with EPA to identify
opportunities to obtain GHG emissions data from smaller facilities while not unduly burdening those facilities. In order to
effectuate this action, the Louisiana DEQ may also need to compile, calibrate, and verify self-reported emissions data
from smaller facilities not currently required to report emissions to the EPA under its Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program.
This data should be made publicly available as a component of the broader DEQ GHG Monitoring Program, as described
in Action 28.1.
Alongside emissions reporting, DEQ should utilize nationally and internationally recognized methodologies to identify and
establish a baseline of carbon intensity values for energy intensive products that are manufactured in Louisiana. Carbon
intensity is frequently measured through life-cycle assessments (LCAs), which assess environmental impacts associated
with all the stages of a product’s life cycle. With Louisiana’s large manufacturing industry, manufacturers would be able
to track carbon intensity according to metrics established by DEQ, based on lifecycle assessments of their products.
Carbon intensity audits will allow for and encourage Louisiana manufacturers to produce and validate lower-carbon
products and to remain competitive in global markets and upon implementation of the Buy Clean Louisiana policy (Action

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

53

6.1). Immediate implementation is recommended so that the Governor’s Office, state agencies, federal partners,
industry, utilities, and environmental stakeholders are able to ensure continual progress towards emission reduction in
this sector. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 51, 108, 140)

ACTION 3.2 Develop an Industry Certification Program for GHG emission reduction activities
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ / EPA / Industry

Develop framework for facility-level
GHG reducing plans

Provide facility-specific support in
emission reduction

With a sufficient baseline of industrial emissions and a monitoring program to track reduction, Louisiana can creatively
develop approaches that mitigate emissions and accommodate varying types, sizes, and operations of industries. To
offer such flexibility in implementation and reward decarbonization, this action establishes a voluntary Industry
Certification Program* in DEQ that incentivize industries to implement GHG reduction measures. This program would
require participating industries to propose and implement site-specific GHG emission reduction plans, tailored to their
industry and locational needs on an achievable timeline towards net zero by 2050. Plans should then be evaluated and
certified by DEQ using a common metric to evaluate and track success, updated by annual site visits and certification
renewals.

*Successful Industry
Certification Programs
Implemented in Other
States
Similar programs have been
successfully implemented in
California and Texas alongside
the EPA Natural Gas STAR
Program.

Industries will only be required to pay a small participation fee, but they can benefit in
many ways: recognition in emission reduction, use of the program’s promotional
material and monitoring capability, advantages in government procurement, potential
grants for GHG-reducing facility improvements, and information sharing across industry
peers. The participation fee Industry Certification Program would cover costs to increase
agency capacity, allowing the program to become self-funding and income-generating.
Medium-term implementation of this action is most beneficial, to ensure a firm baseline
of emissions is established first and drives the certification program. (Associated
Submitted Action Proposals: 62)

ACTION 3.3 Advocate for a national carbon price and explore joining a multi-state carbon pricing system
to advance GHG emissions reduction and direct proceeds toward the advancement of strategies in the
Louisiana Climate Action Plan
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ / Legislature / Governor’s Office

Identify carbon pricing mechanism
best suited for Louisiana

Provide facility-specific
accountability in emission reduction

As inherent in its name, a carbon price applies the external cost of GHG emissions (e.g., public or social costs for damage
to crops from drought, community loss from flooding, etc.) to the source of emissions through a price, intended to shift
the burden for damage of GHG emissions back to those who are responsible for it and who can avoid it. Carbon price can

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

54

either encourage emitters to shift activities to lower emissions or continue emitting
and pay for it. This action tasks Louisiana’s DEQ to explore joining a multi-state
carbon pricing system.* Alongside exploring and joining a regional system, this action
tasks state leaders to continue advocating for a national carbon pricing system,
where the federal government sets a national price on carbon to avoid carbon
leakage across states. Regardless of the system pursued, this action directs
proceeds from the sales of emissions allowances be used to support incentive
programs for the safe and responsible expansion of renewable and clean energy
deployment, alongside providing funds to reduce barriers to low-income electric
vehicle adoption, weatherization and energy efficiency programs, workforce
transition, climate change adaptation, and other goals established by the Louisiana
Climate Action Plan. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 8, 48, 53, 173)
DISSENTING VIEW: While supporting a cap on GHG emissions, one member
objected to this action, citing concerns that trading regimes can allow for
continued emissions and potential double counting. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

*Carbon Pricing Mechanisms
*Putting a Price on Carbon

Multiple mechanisms can be used for
carbon pricing, with cap-and-trade and
carbon tax as leading methods,
applied economy-wide or to a specific
emissions sector. These mechanisms
are used by states, regions, and
nations, designed to support and
incentivize GHG reductions.

Cap-and-trade programs establish a

declining limit on major sources of
GHG emissions (a mandated “cap”)
and creates a powerful economic
incentive for investment in cleaner,
more efficient technologies. Under
these programs, emissions allowances
are purchased and sold by emitting
entities (creating a market to “trade”
allowances).
Alternatively, a carbon tax is a
more straightforward
system,
where
government sets a price
that emitters pay for each ton of
GHG emissions emitted.

ACTION 3.4 Develop and enforce a Net Zero Industry Standard
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ / DNR

Develop a Net Zero Industry Standard

Ensure net zero for industry by 2050

Industrial sector actions require intentional engagement and support to ensure GHG-reducing regulations, incentives,
and programs are implementable for a wide range of facility sizes, types, and operations. With many actions and
approaches set forth in this section, this action tasks DEQ and DNR jointly to develop a Net Zero Industry Standard, a
statewide strategy to achieve net zero emissions for industry by 2050 to implement actions of this section, to realize
industrial emissions reductions from new and existing sources, to align permitting (Action 26.3, Action 26.4) with net
zero, and to attract clean energy industry to the state. DEQ, with its monitoring and regulatory authority, and DNR, with
its permitting authority and energy office, are central implementers of monitoring, inventorying, certifying, and supporting
industrial decarbonization. This cooperative endeavor should outline a strategic path forward to implement actions of
Louisiana’s Climate Action Plan and to monitor and reduce industrial emissions. Alongside ensuring agency collaboration
and role in implementation, this framework should create opportunities for engagement with other state agencies, federal
partners, industry, and environmental advocates to ensure a comprehensive approach is developed, safely implemented,
and provides a tool for accountability and clear mechanism of enforcement. Particularly, this effort should also include
specific outreach and engagement with Louisiana’s top emitters to develop targeted measures to decarbonize
their facilities. DEQ and DNR should provide updates to and receive feedback from the Task Force on development,
implementation, and efficacy of this framework to attain net zero by 2050. DEQ and DNR should also identify any
additional statutory authority needed to accomplish a Net Zero Industry Standard. Alongside the GHG monitoring
program, this framework would benefit the Climate Action Plan most through immediate implementation to set Louisiana
on a trajectory to address its largest emission sector and to best support major emitters of the sector. (Associated
Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action, opposing increased regulation that could outsource GHG
emissions to states with fewer restrictions. DISSENTERS: Bowser, Gray.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

55

STRATEGY 4. Improve efficiencies in and modernization of industrial processes
and facilities
Improving the efficiency of industrial processes is the quickest, simplest way to reduce industrial
energy demand and corresponding GHG emissions. Efficiency can also lower energy cost, mitigate
risk, increase competitiveness, and make electrification more feasible. Efficiency approaches can
encompass internal operations, supply chains, products and services, and cross-cutting issues
across a variety of types and sizes of industry. Actions under this strategy are directed at increasing
efficiency in modernizing existing and in designing new facilities via implementation of standards and
direct engagement with energy users and manufacturers.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Timely Implementation: Increasing industrial efficiency can occur now. Technologies are currently available to
increase efficiencies in the near-term.

•

Quality Improvements: Increasing energy efficiency can improve other important aspects of industrial operation
including product quality, worker health and safety, and environmental performance.

•

Economy and Jobs: Investment in the development and deployment of new technologies to improve efficiency
creates jobs in research and development (R&D) and installation. The implementation of energy efficiency projects
and good energy management practices can save energy and reduce costs for companies, thereby increasing
industrial competitiveness.

ACTION 4.1 Set Industry Efficiency Standards
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR

Pursue rulemaking for
implementation of standard

Reduce energy intensity of industry

Mandatory standards are necessary to signal a commitment to efficiency. This action proposes that the state further
energy efficiency through Industry Efficiency Standards. To ensure that the benefits of efficiency are realized, DNR should
immediately pursue Industry Efficiency Standards through rulemaking, based on total building or structure performance.
Near- and long-term standards will ensure efficiency remains a priority even after appropriate phase-in measures and
near-term goals are met. Agency resources must be allocated to ensure accountability that standards are followed and
goals are met across facilities. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A. Referenced Resources: 1)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action, citing preference for market forces, rather than regulation,
to drive industrial efficiency. DISSENTERS: Bowser, Gray.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

56

ACTION 4.2 Develop and implement a Strategic Energy Management Program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / LSU-IAC

Assess needed support for
implementation of Action 4.1

Support reduced energy intensity of
industry

Education, technical assistance, and financial incentives must accompany mandatory standards to ensure their
widespread adoption and success. Strategic Energy Management (SEM) encourages efficiency through direct
engagement with manufacturers to identify sources of significant energy use, implement efficiency measures, and track
progress toward implementing energy efficiency standards. This action proposes the establishment of an SEM Program
in Louisiana’s DNR Energy Office that would ensure continual energy improvement is integrated into the culture of facility
management. The SEM should partner closely with and expand upon existing work of Industrial Assessment Centers
(IACs), federally funded partnerships with local universities to identify energy efficiency improvements for small and
medium-sized manufacturers. Louisiana’s IAC is a team of Louisiana State University (LSU) faculty and students that
provide no-cost assessments to small and medium-sized U.S. manufacturers to identify potential cost savings from energy
efficiency improvements, waste minimization, pollution prevention, and productivity improvement. Through an SEM
Program, state agencies, industries, and universities should discuss and address concerns, limitations, and feasibility of
various methods to improve efficiencies, building on experience and knowledge of the LSU IAC. The SEM program may
fund pilot projects and conduct studies on carbon intensity, life cycle accounting, competitiveness, resilience, and the
impacts of energy-intensive industry for various processes to guide decisions, track progress, and set further standards.
Alongside efficiency standards, the SEM is immediately implementable and would ensure successful adoption of
efficiency standards. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A. Referenced Resources: 1, 2)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

57

STRATEGY 5. Accelerate industrial electrification, switching to low- or nocarbon fuels and low- or no-carbon feedstocks
The fossil-derived energy used to power Louisiana’s industrial sector is the state’s largest source of
GHG emissions. Moving this energy demand to no-carbon electricity and fuels is the most powerful
action that can be taken to mitigate Louisiana’s emissions and ensure Louisiana remains a global
industry leader in a net-zero future. Some electrification technology is readily available and
deployable across various industrial processes, particularly for those of low- and medium-heat and
for green hydrogen in high-heat processes. However, decarbonizing industrial processes is a newer
challenge with few blueprints to follow. Several actions under this strategy highlight the importance
of research and development and pilot projects to better understand how electrification, low- and nocarbon fuels, and carbon capture, use, and storage (CCUS) can best be deployed in Louisiana’s
industrial facilities.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Public Confidence: Tackling Louisiana’s largest emissions sources head-on will inspire additional action at the local
and facility levels. Leadership from the state and industry, showing that Louisiana is serious about mitigating its
hardest-to-abate emissions, will increase confidence in the state’s industrial future and commitment to the clean
energy transition.

•

Economy and Jobs: Investments in electrification and industrial fuel-switching will create jobs in retrofit and new
facility projects, piloting technology and approaches that can be used on industrial facilities around the world with
Louisiana leading the way.

•

Human and Environmental Health: Reducing fossil energy combustion in and near industrial facilities can reduce
not just GHG emissions, but other pollutants as well, improving the health of fenceline communities and benefitting
the environment.

ACTION 5.1 Accelerate electrification of industrial processes and equipment through pilot projects,
incentives, and requirements
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LED / DNR / PSC / Governor’s Office
/ Industry

Invest in mechanisms to accelerate
industrial electrification

Abate industry emissions through
electrification to the extent
practicable

Technology currently exists to electrify many types of systems and processes within industrial facilities, but the economic
and feasibility and scalability of this technology has not been widely demonstrated in Louisiana. This action proposes the
development of pilot projects to electrify systems within Louisiana industrial facilities (e.g., building systems and motors)
to demonstrate the potential for more widespread implementation. Electric furnaces for temperatures above 350°C are
also ripe for pilot projects, as they are in development but not yet technologically mature for industrial use.
Alongside demonstration projects, incentives will meaningfully drive changes in industrial investment. This action tasks
Louisiana to advocate for a federal industrial-scale electrification incentive, similar to the 45Q tax credit for carbon
capture and storage (CCS). Such large-scale, near-term federal and state investment will drive demand for electrification,

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

58

facilitating accelerated progress towards industrial decarbonization and grid transformation. Any incentives should be
based on criteria that prioritize communities most closely impacted by industry and where explicit reduction co-benefits
of replacement technology have been identified and will be most quickly realized. Alongside federal and state investment,
this action tasks Louisiana Economic Development (LED) to work with DNR and PSC to begin developing regulatory
requirements for industrial transformation to electrification by 2050. Demonstration projects and incentives, alongside
new regulation and enforcement, are all meaningful drivers of innovation for industrial-scale electrification. (Associated
Submitted Action Proposals: 29, 63)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action, citing preference for market forces, rather than regulation,
to drive industrial electrification. DISSENTERS: Bowser, Gray.

ACTION 5.2 Promote low-carbon alternative fuels and feedstocks for petrochemical industrial processes
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / U.S.-DOE / Industry

Invest in research and demonstration
projects to accelerate fuel- and
feedstock-switching

Abate heavy industry emissions
through alternative feedstocks and
fuels to the extent practicable

Industrial feedstocks (raw materials used to supply a manufacturing process) have traditionally been petroleum, natural
gas, and their derivatives. Natural gas is also widely combusted in Louisiana to achieve high temperatures for chemical
manufacturing and petroleum refining. Louisiana is one of the largest producers of bulk chemicals, like ammonia, in the
country, and chemical manufacturing accounts for over half of Louisiana’s industrial GHG emissions. As well as being a
large producer of bulk chemicals, Louisiana also utilizes bulk chemicals as intermediate products to create end products
like plastic containers and fertilizers. To reduce emissions from chemicals production and
petroleum manufacturing, low- and no-carbon hydrogen* as well as captured CO2 can
*Low-Carbon Hydrogen
replace carbon-intensive feedstocks. Low-carbon fuels can also replace carbon intensive
Low-carbon
hydrogen
is
fuels that manufacturers currently rely on to achieve the high temperatures needed in
hydrogen produced with a
carbon intensity equal to or
many industrial processes. This action proposes investment in research, development,
less than 2 kilograms of CO2and demonstration of low- and no-carbon fuels and feedstocks, such as low- and no-carbon
equivalent produced at the site
of production per kilogram of
hydrogen, to complement industrial electrification for a comprehensive decarbonization
hydrogen produced, and in
strategy for Louisiana’s heavy chemical industry. To ensure near- and long-term ambition
includes hydrogen produced
from any fuel source (see
to abate emissions along the entire fuel production chain, this action sets a target of
Infrastructure and Jobs Act,
producing 100% low- and no-carbon hydrogen for use in industrial processes by 2050. The
2021).
DNR Energy Office should partner with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) to solicit
funding for Louisiana to lead research, development, and demonstration in this area and become a low- and no-carbon
hydrogen hub for the nation. As electrified equipment becomes more available in the coming years, this action also
proposes Louisiana lead in piloting and deploying low- and no-carbon technologies. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals:
6, 12, 51, 107, 125. Referenced Resources: 1)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Three members objected to this action, dissenting to the inclusion of “low-carbon hydrogen” and
its subsequent perpetuation of fossil fuel use and deployment of CCUS. DISSENTERS: Pichon Battle, Daniels, and
Verchick.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

59

ACTION 5.3 Support the safe and responsible deployment of carbon capture, utilization, and storage for
high-intensity and hard-to-abate emissions
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / U.S.-DOE / Industry /
Communities

Invest in research for siting and
impact assessments of CCUS buildout

Abate remaining high-intensity
emissions through carbon capture
and storage

CCUS* is anticipated to play a critical role in decarbonizing the global economy by addressing high-intensity and hard-toabate emissions that will be necessary to reach net zero. With expansive geologic storage potential, highly concentrated
industrial corridors, and a trained workforce, Louisiana has potential for deployment of this technology and infrastructure.
This is particularly true in the industrial sector, where high temperature processes cannot be readily transitioned to
electrification or low-carbon alternatives and where process emissions from chemical reactions are unavoidable except
with CCUS. However, Louisiana also needs to be assured that the deployment of CCUS
*CCUS
technologies in the state be pursued in a safe and responsible manner that does not
negatively impact communities, ecosystems, and cultural resources.
CCUS

is a suite of
technologies that can play
a significant role in GHG
emission reduction in
combination with other
industrial decarbonization
strategies. Carbon capture
can use a variety of
techniques to remove
emissions from industrial
and power production
operations pre- and postcombustion.

This action proposes that the state continue to work with federal and state partners, industry,
and communities to determine the feasibility and impacts of carbon capture and transport
infrastructure and buildout (see Action 26.2 for more detail), to identify potential sites for
safe and responsible carbon capture storage, and to establish a regulatory and legal
framework that supports responsible deployment of CCUS technologies. While the overall
impacts of CCUS deployment are expected to be positive as they relate to air quality, further
assessment, quantification, and engagement of local communities is needed to fully
understand potential impacts of CCUS on local criteria air pollutants and other emissions
resulting from carbon capture retrofits at industrial facilities. These efforts should result in responsible CCUS projects
that address cumulative pollution and incorporate environmental justice and equity concerns into siting and decision
making. Further actions under Strategy 26 outline specific areas for impact analysis needed in the near-term prior to
permitting and deployment of infrastructure. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 7, 45, 49, 74, 155)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Five members objected to this action, citing concerns over high project costs, low project success
rates, perpetuation of community harm and injustices, and perpetuation of environmental degradation. DISSENTERS:
Pichon Battle, Daniels, Verchick, Parfait-Dardar, Manning-Broome.

ACTION 5.4 Invest in research for utilizations of captured carbon and life cycle analyses to understand
their overall impact
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Universities

Solicit funding to understand
utilization techniques

Recycle emissions through utilization
of captured carbon

The capture and use of CO2 to create valuable products (CCUS) has potential to lower the net costs of reducing emissions
while removing CO2 from the atmosphere. This process of utilization refers to the use of CO2 directly or as a feedstock in
industrial or chemical processes to produce carbon-containing products that generate economic value. Utilization

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

60

technologies of CCUS are still nascent in form and barriers to implementation remain, so more funding is needed to
research and pilot various techniques. This action proposes that Louisiana universities solicit funding for studies that
more comprehensively understand various utilization techniques and their applicability and feasibility to reduce
emissions from Louisiana industries. Research should begin in the short-term to influence and inform medium- and longterm implementation. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Three members objected to this action, citing opposition to new markets that incentivize CCUS
and subsequently perpetuate fossil fuel use. DISSENTERS: Pichon Battle, Daniels, and Verchick.

Action 5.5 Develop Industrial Cluster Decarbonization Plans to plan for and direct facility-level
investment
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

U.S.-DOE / DEQ / DNR / PSC /
Utilities / Industry / Communities

Strategically plan decarbonization of
industrial clusters

Provide cluster-specific support in
emission reduction

Louisiana is home to three major “industrial clusters,” geographic areas where industries are co-located and share
resources. Though they are major emission sources, clusters provide opportunities for deployment of decarbonization
technologies at scale, sharing of risks and resources of their location, and aggregation and optimization of energy
demand. This action proposes the U.S. DOE, DEQ, and DNR Energy Office partner with utilities, the PSC, industrial
clusters, and nearby communities to develop site-specific Industrial Cluster Decarbonization Plans (“Cluster Plans”) that
utilize industry co-location to develop facility-level decarbonization measures. Cluster Plans should be led by companies
in the respective clusters with leadership from the U.S. DOE, DEQ, DNR Energy Office, and neighboring communities to
focus on transmission buildout, grid updates, and storage capacity to facilitate industrial-scale electrification; to develop
and utilize hydrogen and CCS hubs; and to meaningfully consider concerns of nearby communities. State leadership
should build upon initiative taken by state agencies in Action 3.4, with federal engagement regarding funding
opportunities and pilot projects. Since success is dependent upon collaboration and unified action across all
stakeholders, development and adoption of Cluster Plans should allow industry to tailor action to their specific needs and
locations, while also meaningfully engaging and addressing the needs of surrounding communities. Action by facilities in
major industrial clusters is central in meaningful reduction of industrial emissions and grid transformation, so results of
this action should further those of this strategy and of the “Clean Energy Transition” section. (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 29, 71, 73, 139)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Three members objected to this action. One member raised opposition to the perpetuation of
industrial clusters due to pollution concerns for neighboring communities. Two other members oppose the promotion
of CCUS hubs in these industrial clusters and do not believe such hubs can be developed in a way that meaningfully
considers concerns of nearby communities. DISSENTERS: Pichon Battle, Verchick, and Manning-Broome.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

61

STRATEGY 6. Promote reduced-carbon materials
The lifecycle emissions and embodied carbon in fuels, construction materials, and other products
are an easily overlooked source of GHG emissions that can be mitigated. Using the government’s
power of the purse to encourage and incentivize selection of materials and products created through
low-carbon intensity processes is a powerful tool for building cleaner while creating a stronger market
for low-carbon products. Actions under this strategy aim to address material sourcing in a systematic
approach, from public construction projects to household recycling, to reduce Louisiana’s reliance
on the use of higher carbon intensity products.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Economy and Jobs: An understanding of the GHG emissions from materials production and supply chains can help
state and federal entities make better choices when investing in construction projects. Increased government
demand for lower carbon alternatives, with requirements to source from within the U.S., will spur economic growth
and innovation to meet new requirements.

•

Community Engagement and Environmental Stewardship: State and local programs that consider the life cycle of
products can serve as an entry point for greater public engagement in climate action. Commitment from the state
and private sector to identify reuse opportunities for waste streams can inspire individual action to continue waste
reduction.

ACTION 6.1 Develop a “Buy Clean Louisiana” policy for procurement of materials with lower carbon
footprints for use in public construction projects
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA

Secure low-carbon product through
procurement practices and laws

Reduce GHG footprint of state
government while growing market for
clean and green products

Adoption of a “Buy Clean Louisiana” policy utilizes procurement to create market shifts and incentivize the use of building
materials (e.g., concrete and steel) manufactured through less carbon intensive processes to reduce the GHG emission
footprint of construction. This action, spurred by Louisiana’s Division of Administration (DOA), would require all state
agencies to consider embodied carbon emissions (all CO2 emitted in producing materials) of industrial products when
contracting for state infrastructure and non-infrastructure projects, which would be assisted through carbon intensity
audits of Action 3.1. Securing green vendors through procurement is immediately implementable through adjusting
procurement procedures of DOA. However, incentivizing use of green vendors through weighted scoring criteria will
require legislative action that should be expedited. Buy Clean has been pursued by other states, with programs in
development for Texas, Colorado, New York, Oregon, Minnesota, Connecticut, New Jersey, and Washington, and one
established in California. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 135)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

62

ACTION 6.2 Explore how circular economy principles can be applied to lifecycles of products created
and used in Louisiana
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ / Waste Management Entities /
NGOs / Universities

Invest in pilot projects to reduce
lifecycle emissions of products

Minimize wasted energy through
circular principles

A circular economy is a systemic approach to economic development based on understanding of product lifecycles.
Circular economies are designed to benefit businesses, society, and the environment while promoting zero waste – where
every material, after use, becomes the feedstock for another use. Reducing GHG emissions by implementing material
waste reduction programs, providing incentives for recycling, and investing in new technologies that consider the
“lifecycle” of material products (e.g., plastics) are important actions to consider when reducing overall wasted energy.
This action, coordinated across DEQ, waste management entities, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and private
industry, tasks university partners with reviewing opportunities to increase efficiency in recycling practices, exploring
possible incentives for industrial use of recycled materials, and identifying other opportunities for the productive reuse
of waste materials in Louisiana. Louisiana universities should then work with state agencies and manufacturers involved
in the promotion of exports of goods and materials manufactured in Louisiana to develop specific supply chain
opportunities for the application of circular economy principles. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 72, 82, 85)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, rejecting the promotion of recycling plastics and instead
calling for an end to production of unnecessary plastic production. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION

63

Actively Managed
Methane Emissions
Methane is more than twenty-five times as potent as
carbon dioxide at trapping heat in the atmosphere,
which makes it important to actively mitigate the
highest sources of methane. Though methane is
present in many sectors and throughout other
sections, methane is addressed separately here to
emphasize potential to mitigate oil and gas
infrastructure emissions through short-term action.
Increased resources for decommissioning legacy
infrastructure paired with monitoring and regulation
on oil and gas infrastructure are significant
strategies required to manage methane emissions.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

• STRATEGY 7: Increase and
mobilize resources for
decommissioning legacy oil and
gas infrastructure
• STRATEGY 8: Monitor and
regulate methane emissions
64

STRATEGY 7. Increase and mobilize resources for decommissioning legacy oil
and gas infrastructure
Charting a course for Louisiana’s clean energy transition must address the persistent and complex
challenge of methane emitted from oil and gas infrastructure, particularly orphaned wells. Orphaned
wells are abandoned oil and gas wells for which no one can be identified as a responsible party or
where the responsible party has failed to maintain the infrastructure. Management of this legacy and
inactive infrastructure presents a unique challenge since legal responsibility and potential safety may
shift over time. Without steps that tighten active enforcement and make available additional
resources to adequately manage these sites, methane leakage from legacy infrastructure will
continue to impose an economic, environmental, and public health toll on surrounding communities.
Actions under this strategy aim to address legacy infrastructure through tightening regulations and
enforcement at the state level while aligning with near-term federal funding opportunities.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Economy, Jobs, and Education: Investment of funds specifically for worker training and retraining in plugging leaks
of legacy and abandoned wells can position Louisiana’s residents for increased employment opportunities and
additional career pathways. Engagement with community colleges across the state should be central in
implementation.

•

Public Health: Addressing legacy infrastructure can reduce potential negative environmental and public health
impacts of these sites to surrounding communities.

•

Environmental Protection: Legacy site remediation reduces potential harm of orphaned and abandoned wells to
surrounding ecosystems and can even improve ecosystem functioning through restoration practices.

ACTION 7.1 Hold former well operators accountable for orphaned wells
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / Legislature

Pursue rulemaking to tighten the
definition of “responsible party” and
establish a companion database

Provide clarity and accountability for
responsible parties

Leaks from orphaned wells create a large source of methane emissions where operators are not legally held responsible
after wells are plugged and abandoned. This action recommends legislative and regulatory measures to ensure that
former operators are held responsible for abandoned wells. This action recommends that definition of “responsible party”
be amended through legislation, rulemaking by DNR, or a combination thereof to include all former operators. This
proposed definition of “responsible party” will help to ensure that the responsibility for abandoned infrastructure
does not shift to the state over time. DNR should also collect and publish a database of orphaned wells that indicates
the responsible parties to clearly identify the location and ownership of infrastructure in the event leaks are detected
and need to be repaired immediately. Other opportunities should be explored to strengthen accountability through
legislation or rulemaking by DNR, like creating or clarifying a right of action for landowners with abandoned wells on their
properties
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

65

to sue responsible parties to force well plugging and site clearance. This action should be pursued immediately to identify
responsible parties and kickstart methane reductions. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 167)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, dissenting to the language that allows landowners authority
to sue responsible parties. DISSENTER: Gray.

ACTION 7.2 Strengthen financial security requirements for plugging wells
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / Legislature

Pursue legislation to raise financial
security and remove blanket
securities

Incentivize compliance with operator
requirements

Financial security requirements are state-required bonds that guarantee compliance of operators with regulations for the
issuance of permits for oil and gas exploration, drilling, and plugging. Since 2014, DNR’s Office of Conservation has
implemented stronger regulatory practices of requiring financial security from operators and more frequent inspections,
which has caused the number of identified orphaned wells to nearly double. However, extensive loopholes* in financial
security regulation allow operators to avoid meeting financial security requirements, leading to a
*Loopholes in
failure to plug wells. Therefore, this action recommends comprehensive legislative reform to raise
Regulation
the amount of financial security and remove the ability of operators to use blanket securities, a
Of the 716 wells
technique which allows the operator to circumvent financial security. Additional financial security
that have been
should be added to the Oilfield Site Restoration (OSR) Program to fund plugging of abandoned
orphaned
since
financial security
infrastructure, where no responsible party can be identified. Other statutory reforms could include
became
a
removing the cap on the OSR fund, requiring site-specific trust accounts for all wells involved in an
requirement, 55%
were exempt from
ownership transfer, and increasing the bonding requirement for all wells in the coastal zone.
financial security.
(Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 166, 168)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, citing previous legislative action in recent years to address
funding, improvements in the law, and the creation of state level committees to review the process. DISSENTER:
Gray.

ACTION 7.3 Tighten the “future utility” designation and requirements for inactive wells
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / Legislature

Pursue rulemaking to tighten the
definition of “future utility”

Provide clarity and accountability for
inactive wells

Under current regulation, operators can classify inactive wells with a “future utility” status if the well has potential for use
in the future. However, DNR’s ability to grant indefinite extensions creates a higher risk for “future utility” wells to become
orphaned wells and subsequently creates potential negative impacts* on the environment and communities. This action

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

66

recommends that DNR’s Office of Conservation develop measures that tighten the
definition and requirements of a “future utility” designation in its application and limit
the duration a well can remain at “future utility” status. Under this action, current
“future utility” wells would be reviewed and added to the list of orphaned wells as
appropriate. Similar to other actions in Strategy 7, this action requires, and would
benefit from, immediate action. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 169)

*Loopholes in Regulation
For example, over 1500 wells have
been classified as “future utility”
status for more than 25 years, over
400 more than 50 years. Over

7000 wells are currently listed as
“future utility” and have had that
status more than 5 years.

ACTION 7.4 Provide workforce training to plug legacy wells
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR

Invest in workforce training programs
for monitoring and plugging wells

Provide Louisiana workers
opportunities to transition

Current Louisiana law limits operator responsibility to initial plugging and abandonment; however, even properly capped
and plugged oil and gas wells can weaken and leak over time. This action proposes investment in training
Louisiana’s workforce to monitor wells and quickly respond to leaks by plugging or replugging them as needed. This
action tasks DNR’s Office of Conservation to establish an Abandoned Well Pilot Program from federal and state funding
that provides training, equipment, and jobs for unemployed residents in Louisiana to plug leaking abandoned wells.
Pilots of this program should be initiated in underserved communities with the highest concentration of oil and gas
infrastructure and leaks. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 131)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

67

STRATEGY 8. Monitor and regulate methane emissions
Methane, more than twenty-five times more potent than CO2, is a common and elusive GHG that
must be monitored and abated for Louisiana to meet its emissions goals. Alongside leakage from
pipeline infrastructure, methane is also intentionally and unintentionally released into the
atmosphere during routine industrial practices, including at the wellhead during extraction, during
transport and storage, during processing and handling, and in instances of incomplete combustion.
Waste management facilities and sites, like landfills, are also sources of methane emissions that
require monitoring and regulation. Stopping these leaks and avoiding intentional methane releases
both require new techniques for monitoring, measuring, and capturing methane, set forth in actions
of this strategy.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Economy & Jobs: Increasing the efficiency of methane extraction, reducing methane leakage, and maximizing
methane recapture creates fewer economic losses from waste and leaks. Repairing methane leaks can also create
jobs.

•

Effectiveness and Longevity: Methane leaks and intentional releases are not fully known or tracked, so monitoring
programs using existing and emerging technologies can ensure leaks are detected and quickly repaired, increasing
the effectiveness of methane reduction.

•

Human and Environmental Health: Reducing methane leaks can improve air quality and pipeline safety, benefiting
Louisiana’s ecosystems and residents. Data freely available to the public can build community support for actions
directed at curbing emissions. With transparent access to methane emission information, communities can see
realized benefits of investment in methane reduction.

ACTION 8.1 Enact methane waste rules
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DNR / DEQ

Pursue rulemaking to align with
methane rules of other states and the
EPA

Reduce amount of methane released

This action proposes that, through the Net Zero Standard in Action 3.4, DNR’s Office of Conservation and DEQ
collaboratively develop rules that require methane emitters to establish a baseline methane waste capture rate,
determined by their quarterly reports, and enact methane waste rules in line with rules
*Methane Rules in New
of other states. States such as New Mexico and Colorado* have recently enacted
Mexico and Colorado
methane waste rules with support from industry and environmental groups. Alongside
work of states, the EPA drafted federal methane rules in the proposed Standards of
New Mexico requires operators to
Performance for New, Reconstructed, and Modified Sources and Emissions
capture no less than 98% of
produced gas by December 31,
Guidelines for Existing Sources (hereafter called “Standards for Performance”),
2026, starting on April 1, 2022.
published in the Federal Register November 15, 2021. Louisiana should advocate for
Although not setting a strict capture
enactment of federal rules and ensure that rules pursued by the state
limit, Colorado requires use of
complement impending federal standards. DEQ and DNR should immediately begin
modern,
zero-emitting
(clean)
components at all new and most
existing facilities to limit methane
emissions.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

68

studying the standard best suited for regulating methane waste in Louisiana and begin the rulemaking process to align
with the progress of other states. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 43, 89, CO, NM)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, citing opposition to its reference and connection to the Net
Zero Industry Standard of Action 3.4. DISSENTER: Gray.

ACTION 8.2 Establish methane monitoring stations in the GHG Monitoring Program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ

Incorporate emerging technologies
into methane monitoring

Monitor methane releases with more
frequency and accuracy

The most effective way to reduce leaks is to require frequent, and where possible, continuous monitoring. This
action proposes that DEQ incorporate methane monitoring capabilities into the DEQ GHG Monitoring Program,
proposed in Action 28.1 to ensure methane emissions are adequately understood and monitored. DEQ should work with
outside stakeholders to utilize and deploy emerging technologies, such as remote sensing and satellite imagery,
alongside traditional in-situ sensing for continuous monitoring of methane emissions. The GHG Monitoring Program
should also ensure that data and maps that show regular fluxes in methane emissions are provided freely to the
public and are updated on an annual basis. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 76, 151)

DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, opposing the premise that constant monitoring, instead of
elimination of fossil fuel extraction, is the most effective way to reduce leaks. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

ACTION 8.3 Enable an effective Leak Detection and Repair Program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ / DNR / U.S. EPA

Strengthen LDAR best practices to
monitor and fix malfunctioning
practices

Repair methane releases with more
frequency and accuracy

To align with federal rules to curb methane emissions by 30% by 2030, more regularly scheduled inspections, sufficient
oversight measures, facility-wide leak rate goals, frequent component monitoring, and other measures are needed to
complement federal funding and comprehensive monitoring to ensure leaks throughout the supply chain are swiftly
detected and repaired. Many states have established Leak Detection and Repair (LDAR) programs, modeled after the
U.S. EPA LDAR Program and Best Practices Guide, to monitor GHG emissions and criteria pollutants and require owners
and operators to find and fix leaky and malfunctioning equipment at production facilities, compressor stations, natural
gas storage facilities, and process plants within a set time period of detection. Leak detection using infrared, flyovers,
remote sensing, and other early detection technologies can shorten timelines for reporting and repair compared to
technologies utilized by many existing LDAR programs. Alongside reduced emissions, air quality and pipeline safety
improvements make LDAR programs very cost-effective for all parties involved. Provided with the proper funds, DNR and

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

69

DEQ, through the Net Zero Standard in Action 3.4, should build on and strengthen existing LDAR practices implemented
by DEQ for criteria pollutants through early leak detection, and develop comprehensive methane LDAR, consistent with
the enacted version of the EPA’s proposed Standards of Performance (see Action 8.1). (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 91)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACTIVELY MANAGED METHANE EMISSIONS

70

Transportation,
Development, and the
Built Environment
Five
strategies
and
twenty-three
actions
encompass broad aspects of three priority areas:
land
use
planning
transportation,
and
and
the
built
environment.
development,
Transportation addresses decarbonization of
passenger, medium-duty, and heavy-duty vehicles
alongside freight, aircraft, and waterborne
shipping.
Development
and
the
built
environment
strategies
seek
to
reduce
emissions
and
enhance
resilience
through
coordinated
comprehensive
land
use
planning
and
increased
efficiencies
for homes and buildings.

• STRATEGY 9: Accelerate adoption and accessibility
of low- and zero-emission vehicles and fuels

• STRATEGY 10: Reduce vehicle miles traveled and
increase transportation efficiencies
• STRATEGY 11: Increase urban, rural, and regional
public transit service
• STRATEGY 12: Coordinate land use planning to
reduce sprawl and support healthy and resilient
communities
• STRATEGY 13: Improve the efficiency and resilience
of homes and non-residential buildings

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

71

STRATEGY 9. Accelerate adoption and accessibility of low- and zero-emission
vehicles and fuels
Transitioning transportation from fossil fuel combustion to electric vehicles and low-carbon fuels will
play a critical role in reducing emissions from this sector. Louisiana can support greater adoption of
clean vehicles by expanding the infrastructure to support this transition, including charging and
fueling stations that are accessible to more drivers and passengers across income levels. This
strategy includes actions focused on light-duty passenger vehicles as well as actions tailored to the
additional technological and infrastructural needs to transition medium- and heavy-duty
transportation, shipping, and aviation to low or zero-carbon fuels. The state of Louisiana can lead by
example through efforts to transition public fleets to low- and zero-emission vehicles.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

•

•

Supporting the Workforce: Investments enhancing transportation infrastructure, in conjunction with targeted job
training, can provide employment opportunities to Louisianans, including those of differing educational
backgrounds.
Strengthening the Economy: Global and national trends may lead to broad, increased use of electric vehicles.
This shift may alter expectations of residents, tourists, and commercial interests alike, and proactive preparation
will enable a smooth transition and mitigate negative economic impacts.
Human and Environmental Health: Increasing use of electric vehicles – which produce limited or no tailpipe
emissions – can improve overall air quality with subsequent benefits to public health and the environment.

ACTION 9.1 Shift public fleets to low and zero-emission vehicles
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA

Update procurement practices to
meet public fleet transition goals

Transition 50% public fleets to lowand zero-emission vehicles and fuels
by 2035 and 100% by 2050

With over 80,000 public vehicles operating in Louisiana, significant GHG emissions reduction can be realized by
transitioning state and local government fleets to low- and zero-emission vehicles and fuels. This action would set a
statewide policy and goal for the transition of 50% of public fleet vehicles to low- and zero-emission vehicles and fuels
by 2035 and 100% by 2050. Unless agency needs dictate otherwise, passenger, light-duty vehicles should move to
zero-emission, electric vehicles, while heavy-duty trucks and vehicles should initially transition to low-carbon
alternative fuels, such as renewable diesel, that can be used in existing vehicles. Action should be led by DOA but
requires coordination across state agencies, local government, and other public fleet users (e.g., levee boards) to
update procurement policies and practices. To ensure successful implementation, training for vehicle maintenance
should be made available to fleet managers. In order to meet the fleet transition goal, implementation must begin
immediately with DOA prioritizing the transition for passenger and other light-duty vehicles while technology continues
to evolve for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 28, 36, 41, 143, 157)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, dissenting to the use of alternative fuels that rely on industrial
grains and harm communities and the environment. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

72

ACTION 9.2 Expand the availability and reduce socio-economic and geographic barriers to low- and
zero-emission passenger vehicles and supporting infrastructure
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / NGOs / MPOs / Local
Governments

Utilize federal funding to intentionally
build out infrastructure

250 electric vehicle charging stations
per 100,000 residents by 2050

As low- and zero-emission vehicles become increasingly available for passenger transit, steps need to be taken to ensure
strategic and equitable statewide buildout of vehicle electrification infrastructure, with measures to prioritize access for
underserved and overburdened communities. Louisiana’s Department of Transportation and Development (DOTD), in
partnership with Louisiana Clean Fuels and others with local knowledge, can utilize federal funds to deploy electric vehicle
charging infrastructure across the state in a way that is strategic and increases access for all communities. A goal of 250
stations per 100,000 residents by 2050 should be adopted to ensure progress is made towards this action. Alongside
charging infrastructure, action must also be taken to ensure access to the vehicles themselves across more income
levels. Together, DOTD and partners should also provide community education to increase the demand for and adoption
of electric vehicles. To this end, incentives for low- and zero-emission vehicles should be reinstated by the Legislature,
either in the form of a targeted incentive program or tax credit according to income, to accelerate adoption and reduce
barriers to vehicle access. Incentives need to prioritize up-front grants, over rebates and loans, to provide equitable
access and a means by which low-income households can purchase electric vehicles. (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 83, 137, 175)

ACTION 9.3 Prepare for the expanded availability of alternative fuels for waterborne transport, mediumand heavy-duty vehicles, and aviation
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD Transportation Research Center
/ universities / freight companies /
ports / long-haul trucking

Research efficacy of alternative fuels
to decarbonize heavy transit

Research and deploy at scale
solutions to decarbonize freight

As electrification technologies and alternative fuels continue to improve*, increased availability of existing alternative
fuels is critical to reducing GHG emissions now and facilitating a smooth transition to carbon neutral long-haul
transportation. However, near-term investment is needed to research, pilot, and deploy effective low- and no-carbon fuels
for different facets of long-haul transportation. This action proposes increased access
*Needed Improvements
to alternative fuels (particularly for heavy trucks), efficient and sustainable fuels
Unlike light-duty vehicles, medium(particularly for aviation), and investments in innovation (particularly for waterborne
and heavy-duty vehicles as well as
transportation). To get there, Louisiana’s universities and DOTD’s Transportation
other modes of freight transportation
(waterborne and airborne) are more
Research Center can immediately take the lead in advancing and innovating
challenging to decarbonize with
solutions that will reduce the GHG emissions from medium- and heavy-duty vehicles,
current technology and will rely on
alternative fuels in the near-term due
waterborne shipping, and aviation. Universities should work with freight companies
to increased weight and inefficiency
to tailor decarbonization research for Louisiana-specific needs and industries.
of electrification technology.
Specific to waterborne freight, ports should lead in partnership with shipping
companies to identify and ensure availability of low- and no-carbon fuels at the port. Specific to long-haul trucking,
trucking companies can lead in partnership with Louisiana’s DOTD to secure interest in and ensure availability of

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

73

renewable diesel along interstates. Meanwhile, other successful programs like the Port of New Orleans’ Clean Truck
Replacement Incentive Program should be implemented across Louisiana ports. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals:
12, 13, 22, 27, 84, 94, 125)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, objecting to the use of alternative fuels that rely on natural
gas, methane, and biofuels and harms communities and the environment. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

ACTION 9.4 Implement targeted pilot projects to accelerate the transition of medium- and heavyduty vehicles to low- and zero-emission vehicles
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / DNR / DEQ

Identify and pursue pilot projects to
decarbonize heavy transit

Research and deploy solutions at scale
to decarbonize freight

To accelerate the deployment of electrification technology for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles and freight, targeted pilot
programs and demonstration projects can encourage and accelerate a transition to low- emission medium- and heavyduty vehicles now, while technology advances to become more accessible and deployable at scale in the long-term. This
action proposes DOTD, in partnership with DNR and DEQ, identify and implement targeted pilot projects to test emerging
technologies in the near term that prepare for deployment at scale of clean medium- and heavy-duty transit and longhaul trucking. With recent federal investment in freight truck electrification, states agencies should maximize near-term
funding opportunities and partner with the U.S. DOE to access and serve as a conduit for freight decarbonization across
the nation. Similarly, funding to replace diesel-fueled with electric school buses is available at the federal level. These
vehicle transitions not only reduce emissions but can also serve as mobile power sources to meet community energy
needs post-disaster. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 41, 84, 137)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

74

STRATEGY 10. Reduce vehicle miles traveled and increase transportation
efficiencies
A central approach to reduce GHG emissions from the transportation sector is to reduce total travel
demand and overall fuel usage by passenger and freight vehicles. Fewer trips and fewer vehicles on
the road also reduce traffic congestion and traffic-related accidents. This strategy pursues efficiency
through reduced vehicle idling, lowers the number of trips taken by expanding access to online
services and remote work capabilities, and shifts passenger and freight trips to more efficient modes
of transportation.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Human and Environmental Health: In addition to reducing GHG emissions, reduction of vehicle miles traveled
would reduce the production of other pollutants found in vehicle exhaust that can be harmful to public health
and the environment. Furthermore, increasing safe access to active transportation options such as walking and
biking provides more opportunities for exercise and is tied to improved public health outcomes.

•

Broader Access to Essential Services and Job Opportunities: Increasing internet access and teleworking
opportunities can provide additional access to essential services and employment opportunities to individuals
for whom working or traveling outside the home may be challenging.

ACTION 10.1 Promote opportunities to reduce vehicle miles traveled
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / MPOs / Local Governments

Utilize multiple mechanisms to
implement VMT reduction strategize

Double use of alternative modes of
transportation by 2035

Vehicle Miles Traveled, or VMT,* are a common measure of transportation demand and can serve as a proxy for reducing
GHG emissions associated with the movement of people or goods. This action proposes that Louisiana set a goal of
doubling the use of alternative modes of transportation by 2035. To meet this goal, the action tasks DOTD to support
regional Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) and local governments to
*Reducing VMT
implement VMT reduction strategies that support, promote, and incentivize: 1) Complete
Promoting alternatives to VMT
Streets infrastructure (where the safe mobility for all users including pedestrians,
can be accomplished through
bicyclists, public transit users, and automotive users is enabled and supported); and 2)
transportation mode shifting,
where alternatives to automobile
the effective integration of local and regional transit and land use strategies, such as
travel like walking or bike riding
evaluating how project design criteria and scoping can be modified for different
are encouraged, low-carbon or
more
fuel-efficient
freight
outcomes. This action pairs with the transit initiatives in Strategy 13 and the compact
options, or where multiple
development actions in Strategy 14 and should build on existing success stories from
individual trips are consolidated
through carpooling or public
partnerships with local government, nonprofits, and advocacy groups. (Associated
transit.
Submitted Action Proposals: 69, 70)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

75

ACTION 10.2 Expand broadband internet access
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

BEL Commission

Leverage federal funding for
expansion of broadband access

Reduce vehicle miles traveled through
at-home resources

The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the transition to online services and work from home opportunities, but this
transition has not been widespread nor accessible for all Louisianans due to limited access to broadband internet
connections. Expanding broadband, particularly for rural communities, can facilitate easier access to e-commerce,
telecommuting, employment opportunities, and virtual health while reducing overall transportation demand and GHG
emissions. The state established the Broadband for Everyone in Louisiana (BEL) Commission in 2019 to facilitate
adoption by private sector providers, public entities, and other stakeholders and availability of broadband for Louisiana
residents. This action proposes partnering with the BEL Commission and their 2020 Action Plan to maximize the potential
of expanding broadband availability to mitigate GHG emissions and ensure cross-government and collaboration with
multiple stakeholders to build out broadband effectively, efficiently, and equitably in public rights of ways and through
other means. Specifically, with available federal funds from the 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, this action
tasks the BEL Commission to apply for grants that connect Louisiana’s underserved communities to expanded broadband
access and deployment. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 25)

ACTION 10.3 Enact a state policy that allows for hybrid workplaces and telecommuting
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA

Adopt a statewide hybrid workplace
policy

Reduce vehicle miles traveled through
at-home resources

DOTD implements a variety of Travel Demand Management (TDM) strategies designed to maximize choice while reducing
travel, single occupant trips, and congestion. TDM options are funded by DOTD and MPOs and include biking, walking,
ridesharing, public transit, telemedicine, and telecommuting. To further reduce regular travel demand in Louisiana, this
action proposes DOA adopt a statewide policy that allows for and encourages hybrid workplaces with reduced or
staggered in-office days with telecommuting for public employees. Alongside reducing emissions, this policy eliminates
time spent commuting and can cut energy usage in public buildings. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 81)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

76

ACTION 10.4 Reduce idling of public fleets
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA

Pursue rulemaking to require
telematics for fleets

Maximize efficiency of GHG-producing
vehicles

One gallon of fuel can be burned per hour of idling, wasting fuel and producing up to 20 pounds of CO2. Idle reduction
technologies and practices can reduce the time that vehicle engines run while at rest and reduce these unnecessary GHG
emissions and fuel waste. This action proposes that DOA require idle reduction telematics be placed on all of Louisiana’s
publicly owned GHG emitting vehicles. Implementation of this action would be supported by fleet telematics software,
already installed in many state-owned vehicles, to manage fuel usage and set an automatic shutoff for vehicles after
prolonged idling. Training for fleet managers and operators in all agencies is necessary to support telematics usage and
successful implementation across public fleets. Telematics requirements should be pursued in the short-term to reduce
emissions from gasoline-fueled vehicles as the public fleet transitions to zero-emission vehicles. (Associated Submitted
Action Proposals: 33, 100, 161)

ACTION 10.5 Explore short-term opportunities and incentives to increase efficiency of freight transport
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / DOA / LED

Invest in research of smart transit
techniques and best practices

Maximize efficiency of energyintensive freight transit

Given the disparity between needed investments for freight infrastructure and available funding, DOTD, in partnership
with DOA and LED, should work with private freight companies (ground, rail, maritime facilities, and aviation) to elicit,
prioritize, and fund project proposals that can improve the efficiency of freight transportation in and through the state.
Project examples include targeting emissions reductions for freight transport along highways, at ports, and at airports
such as those that optimize traffic, directly reduce emissions and idling such as shore power, reduce carbon intensity,
and explore mode shifting in ways that build upon existing DOTD congestion reduction programs. (Associated Submitted
Action Proposals: 1, 33, 106)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

77

STRATEGY 11. Increase urban, rural, and regional public transit service
Reliable public transit systems are pivotal in the effort to reduce VMT and vehicle emissions. The
hallmarks of a successful public transit system include consistent, high rates of ridership and stability
of the systems that support both frequency and reliability of public transit service. To meet VMT
reduction goals, more funding should be allocated to the State Transportation Plan and transit
operations across Louisiana. Additionally, it will be important to coordinate more on-demand rural
transit services and improve regional transit connectivity. This has the potential to connect
communities to employment opportunities and other essential services across the state that are
otherwise inaccessible.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

•

Strengthening the Economy and Providing Access to Jobs and Services: Investing in public transit can provide
direct employment opportunities that strengthen the economy in the short-term, while increasing access to jobs
more broadly by connecting workers to opportunities and providing long-term increases in workforce productivity.
Improving Quality of Life: Public transportation infrastructure in both rural and urban settings can enable all
Louisianans broader regional access to goods and services. It expands access to groceries, health services, and
other basic necessities as well as avenues for recreation or entertainment for individuals and families that do
not own a private vehicle—including members of historically marginalized communities.

ACTION 11.1 Increase financial support to urban transit operators to increase ridership
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / Regional MPOs /
Municipalities / Legislature

Leverage available funding for urban
transit deserts and local jurisdictions

Reduce VMT through connectivity
within urban areas

More reliable and frequent public transit is necessary to increase ridership and reduce single-vehicle trips. Increased
funding for local transit service, particularly in high-population areas of low-wage workers and other areas with
limited transit access sometimes known as transit deserts, will also benefit marginalized, transit-dependent
populations in urban areas and provide competitive access to economic opportunity. This action proposes that
the Legislature allocate more resources through the state budget and the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act to increase funding for transit operations in transit deserts and provide greater funding to the State
Transportation Plan. The state should work with federal partners to ensure more federal funding moves down to
regional MPOs to subsidize annual transit operations, provide resources to urban transit deserts, and allow local
jurisdictions to secure funding more easily for transit locally. To serve transit deserts effectively, funding can be
prioritized by urban transit providers to add smaller vehicles and demand-responsive operations. (Associated Submitted
Action Proposals: 95, 138)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

78

ACTION 11.2 Increase financial support for rural transit service including connectivity to urban transit
systems
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / Local Governments / Rural
Transit Providers

Develop on-demand ridership systems
in rural areas

Reduce VMT through connectivity
within rural areas

Nearly 750,000 of Louisiana’s 4.6 million residents live in rural areas. Therefore, a necessary measure to reduce
passenger vehicles on the road requires expanding access to resources beyond urban centers and greater investment in
rural transit service. This action builds on the prior action focused on local transit in urban areas and proposes that
DOTD, local governments and rural transit providers take a variety of measures to enable resource access to rural
communities including rural bus services, obtaining smaller transit vehicles for more specialized trips, developing
an on-demand ridership system, and scheduling planned trips to city centers coordinated and supported by the
community. A significant impediment for rural transit is the local match of the cost-share for federal dollars, so with an
influx of federal dollars, state allocations and other grants should be utilized and prioritized to support locals in
matching federal funds. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 81, 95, 128)

ACTION 11.3 Invest in regional transit to connect communities to jobs and services across Louisiana
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD / Local MPOs / Rural
Governments / Municipalities

Collaborate and plan intentional
connectivity between cities

Reduce VMT through connectivity
across regions of Louisiana

Alongside local and intra-city transit, regional connectivity can encourage greater use of public transportation across rural
and urban areas and transport systems. Dedicated bus lanes, high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes, and Bus Rapid Transit
on interstates, state highways, and major arterial roadways encourage transit use and carpooling. The federal
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) also includes funding to expand passenger rail service to increase travel
options between cities and states. This action proposes coordination among applicable federal, state, and local agencies
to take advantage of available funding opportunities through the IIJA to advance regional transit initiatives. For example, a
portion of the $66 billion available for passenger rail in the IIJA could be used to support a high-speed rail between New
Orleans and Baton Rouge that could help minimize light-duty and bus travel between Louisiana’s largest cities
for daily commuters, increase tourism-related economic activity, and participation in cultural or entertainment
events. This action proposes federal investment through Louisiana DOTD, local MPOs, rural governments, and
municipalities to intentionally begin collaborating on and planning in the short-term to build infrastructure that supports
medium- and long-term regional connectivity across Louisiana. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

79

STRATEGY 12. Coordinate land use planning to reduce sprawl and support
healthy and resilient communities
Mitigating the emissions causing climate change is interconnected with adapting to the impacts of
climate change, particularly as it pertains to land use and land use management. Reducing sprawl
and promoting compact development, a practice where land is used efficiently and intentionally,
reduces GHG emissions and makes communities more resilient. Compact development promotes
risk reduction and open space conservation while encouraging reuse and retrofit of existing
structures, energy efficiency, use of public transit and active modes of transportation like walking
and biking, and reduced VMT. In order to coordinate across risks, vulnerabilities, relevant ongoing
initiatives, and land use objectives throughout Louisiana, a statewide framework is needed to unify
and guide holistic land use management. Actions under this strategy aim to improve the coordination
of land use practices across the state and to assist local communities in planning for a climate-ready
future.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Protecting the Environment: Reducing sprawl slows expansion of new development into natural settings,
preventing negative impacts to ecosystems and reducing the destruction of habitats.

•

Strengthening Community Resilience: Smart land use planning enables communities to anticipate and mitigate
the potential negative impacts of forces beyond their control, such as designing transportation systems that can
withstand climate-related disasters and formulating proactive solutions to manage population growth.

ACTION 12.1 Create a statewide authority to provide guidance for resilient local land-use practices
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA

Create an Office of State Planning

Support locals in comprehensive land
use, climate mitigation, and
adaptation planning

This action proposes the creation of an Office of State Planning housed within DOA. This Office should facilitate
coordinated decision making as it relates to comprehensive land use, prioritizing initiatives that support flood risk
reduction, maximizes community resilience, and reduces GHGs. The Office of State Planning should build strong
partnerships across state agencies and with local and regional officials to demonstrate the potential for land use
practices to help meet climate goals and reduce climate risk. The Office should support locals in the development of
comprehensive land use plans and climate adaptation and mitigation plans that address the spectrum of
relevant community challenges and incorporate the needs of underserved and overburdened populations. This land use
authority should also partner with DOTD to promote and implement VMT reduction measures (Action 10.1) and
compact development practices (Action 12.2). (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 18, 40, 69, 128)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

80

ACTION 12.2 Encourage climate-conscious land use planning through local trainings, incentives, tools,
and model standards and ordinances
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA Office of State Planning / DOTD

Convene stakeholders to plan and
design compact development across
levels of government

Maximize VMT reduction and
utilization of regional transit through
land use planning

To encourage climate-conscious development, this action proposes DOTD and the Office of State Planning start in the
near-term by convening public, private, and local government bodies to assist in planning and designing compact
development, permitting, and regulation to maximize land conservation, community resilience, and reduced VMT. After
receiving feedback from local groups, the state, through DOTD and the Office of State Planning, should pilot
promising approaches to local planning and design, incentives, or regulatory systems that support compact
development, Complete Streets, and equitable transit access. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 65, 69, 70)

ACTION 12.3 Align statewide transportation planning with land use and compact development planning
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA Office of State Planning
/Regional MPOs / Local Government

Develop land use and transportation
modeling tools for utilization in
decision making

Maximize VMT reduction and
utilization of regional transit through
land use planning

Transportation infrastructure often dictates how and where land is used and developed in Louisiana. To ensure compact
development, regional transit, and other actions set forth in this section are prioritized in the state, this action proposes
that transportation planning align with smart land use practices. Land use and transportation modeling tools can test
land use scenarios and transportation pricing programs and should be incorporated into how decisions are made in
transportation. This alignment would not only reduce VMT, allow for widespread implementation of Complete Streets,
facilitate equitable access to public transit, and reduce the need for single-occupancy vehicles, but would also allow for
greater implementation of green infrastructure and resilience measures to mitigate against Louisiana’s flood risk. This
action proposes empowering local governments and MPOs to develop tools that provide adequate information on
alignment of these priorities, led by DOA’s Office of State Planning for land use guidance in partnership with DOTD in
transportation guidance. Alignment of transportation planning with smart land use would be led by DOA with support from
DOTD in close partnership by MPOs and local jurisdictions. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 65)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

81

ACTION 12.4 Evaluate the climate impacts of major state-funded transportation projects
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOTD

Incorporate a climate impact analysis
into DOTD project planning and
design

Mitigate unintentional emissions
through large-scale transportation

Major transportation projects, such as the construction of new or expanded roadways, can have multiple cascading
impacts on GHG emissions as well as community resilience—from the materials used in construction to the spurring of
new areas of development to inducing more VMT and increased congestion. This action should require that proposals for
medium- to large-scale state-funded transportation projects include an analysis by DOTD of their climate impacts,
including induced GHG emissions as well impacts on community resilience from future weather events. Tools developed
by DOTD for this analysis would be made freely available to parish and municipal governments to inform their decisions
about locally-funded transportation projects. Transportation spending can also help jump start the “Buy Clean Louisiana”
program (Action 6.1), prioritizing lower carbon intensity materials and advancing best practices and standards in road
construction. Further, this action prepares Louisiana for policies set forth through the U.S. Department of
Transportation’s Climate Action Plan, released in August of 2021. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)

ACTION 12.5 Develop a model solar ordinance for adoption by local governments
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA Office of State Planning / DNR

Create model solar ordinance policy
materials

Encourage purchasing of renewable
power

The interest by solar developers in building out infrastructure in Louisiana communities is increasing steadily and will
need to continue to grow to meet Louisiana’s clean power needs. Ordinances can be important tools for guiding these
developments while achieving community goals and standards. However, many - if not most - local governments lack the
capacity and technical expertise to develop ordinances on their own. Furthermore, lack of knowledge or misinformation
about solar energy facilities may leave communities unprepared and unprotected from the impact of this type of
development. The model solar ordinance developed by this action would be a tool available to local governments and
contain the comprehensive policy language needed to protect properties, environments, and people, as well as guide
and support solar energy investments locally. This tool would provide context, information, and capacity to local
governments, increase predictability of impact, and support current and future solar energy investments that can
significantly help the state transition to renewable energy. This action recommends DOA Office of State Planning, in
partnership with DNR, be the lead and authorizing entity to provide guidance for local governments and coordination with
local land use. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 20)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

82

STRATEGY 13. Improve the efficiency and resilience of homes and nonresidential buildings
Energy efficiency improvements and electrification of building components and appliances can
reduce GHG emissions from residential and commercial buildings, while also reducing utility costs
and potentially decreasing other air pollutants associated with electricity production. Combining
energy efficiency retrofits with storm weatherization and other resilience improvements can ensure
Louisiana homes and businesses are prepared for the future. Actions under this strategy support
building retrofit programs as well as updates to energy efficiency standards and building codes.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Energy Affordability: Enhancing the efficiency of homes decreases overall energy costs for families through
measures like improved insulation, air sealing, and appliance and HVAC efficiency.

•

Economy and Jobs: Increased demand for building retrofits and energy efficiency upgrades could create a
steady pipeline of jobs in the construction trades.

•

Increased Quality of Life: Retrofitting of homes provides opportunities to enhance the quality of life for residents
by mitigating excess energy usage and improving indoor air quality and circulation, while conducting efficiency
upgrades, such as remediation of lead and mold.

ACTION 13.1 Accelerate the retrofitting of existing residential and commercial buildings to support
comprehensive energy efficiency and resilience upgrades
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

PSC / LHC / DNR / DOA-OCD

Inventory and streamline application
to existing efficiency programs

5% retrofit of residential and
commercial buildings each year

With multiple residential and commercial efficiency programs in existence, this action proposes that the PSC, in
partnership with the Louisiana Housing Corporation, DNR, Office of Community Development, and local governments,
streamline existing programs and leverage federal funds to reach a 5% retrofit per year retrofit target. Multiple programs
across various governing entities, including DNR’s Home Energy Loan Program (HELP), the expired Home Energy Rebate
Option (HERO) program, and the Louisiana Housing Corporation (LHC) Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), often
obfuscate eligibility and requirements for potential applicants. Similar to the New Orleans EnergySmart Program, this
action should provide a centralized portal for homeowners or commercial building owners applying to any efficiency
program. The portal should contain a building assessment needed for program applications, clarify the intent of
various efficiency programs, and direct residents and building owners to the efficiency program best suited to their
needs. Lastly, program development through this action should coordinate outreach to encourage homeowners and small
businesses to understand their energy usage, identify possible areas for improved efficiency, and develop grants
that ease barriers for low-income households to participate. This outreach is necessary to provide assistance for lowincome households. Grant funding for existing and future retrofit programs should be prioritized for homeowners and
renters who face the greatest energy cost burden – those who pay more than 5% of their income on electricity bills.
As mentioned in prior actions, opportunities for federal funding will flow through existing weatherization programs, which
will provide immediately realized benefits upon implementation of this action. Alongside federal funding explicit for
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

83

weatherization, federal pre- and post-disaster funding disbursed by the state should be required to incorporate energy
efficiency and weatherization best practices into residential and commercial new builds and retrofits of buildings.
(Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 16, 87, 102)

ACTION 13.2 Redesign and expand property-assessed clean energy (PACE) financing
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature / Local Governments

Pursue legislation for redesign of
PACE

Encourage effectiveness of existing
building efficiency programs

This action provides a voluntary avenue for home and business owners to finance energy efficiency and renewable energy
projects for their property through property-assessed clean energy (PACE). The types of projects under PACE tend to
include energy efficiency improvements (e.g., insulation, weather sealing, high-efficiency water heaters) as well as solar
and other on-site renewable energy systems. Retrofitting low-income homes should also consider roof repairs, which may
be a prerequisite for the effective deployment of rooftop solar. This program covers the up-front cost of qualified energy
improvements with financing from a local government and then spreads the repayments over a longer period such that
the costs of these energy improvements would be distributed over the lifetime of the project. This action proposes working
with the Louisiana Legislature and local governments to redesign, enable, and expand PACE in Louisiana with specific
provisions to provide access to low-income households, and to provide consumer protections. This includes education
and outreach to developers, realtors, mortgage lenders, title companies, appraisers, and homeowners as well as
streamlining and consistency of practices among actors. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 146)

ACTION 13.3 Incentivize the electrification of building components in residential and commercial
buildings
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature

Pursue legislation for efficient and
electric appliance rebates

Encourage efficiency of building
components

Alongside the need to retrofit homes for increased efficiency and weatherization, appliances and systems (e.g., water
heaters, HVACs, driers, and stoves) account for a large share of building energy use. Electrifying these building
components and systems not only reduce GHG emissions when they are powered by renewable or clean electricity, but
they also save the user money due to increased energy efficiency. This action proposes that the Louisiana Legislature
develop a grant program to incentivize the purchase of efficient electric appliances and systems by homeowners and
small businesses. To improve equitable access, grants should be on a graduated scale based on income. This action
would also work with retailers, contractors, and distributors to increase stocking of these appliances, so they are available
options for unplanned upgrades (i.e., appliance breaks). It also includes making point-of-purchase materials more widely
available to increase awareness. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 29)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

84

ACTION 13.4 Strengthen minimum energy and lighting efficiency standards for residential, commercial,
and public buildings
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature / LSUCCC / PSC

Pursue legislation for energy
efficiency code updates and
standards

Require minimum efficiency of
buildings

Minimum efficiency standards can reduce energy demand and the associated GHGs from buildings. Currently, the
authority to set energy efficiency standards for buildings and structures is distributed across multiple state entities,
including the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council (LSUCCC), the state fire marshal, and DNR. This action
proposes that the Louisiana Legislature allow the LSUCCC to update Part IV-Energy Conservation of the International
Residential Code beyond the 2009 edition. This action further proposes that the state fire marshal update the
Commercial Building Energy Conservation Code to strengthen energy efficiency standards. The state fire marshal, and
the LSUCCC should it receive authority to update the Residential Energy Conservation Code, should consult with the
DNR Office of Energy, DOA Office of Facility Planning and Control, local governments, the PSC, LHC, residents, and
key stakeholders when updating these respective codes. Further opportunity for lighting efficiency comes from
transitioning streetlights to LED. LED streetlights require additional action of the PSC to review rate tariffs in
order to stimulate statewide adoption of energy-saving streetlights. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 133)

ACTION 13.5 Lead by example in Louisiana through energy benchmarking in state public buildings
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DOA

Pursue funding for implementation of
energy benchmarking requirements

Monitor carbon impact of buildings
and building materials

The Louisiana Legislature passed Act 1184 in 2001, requiring benchmarking and disclosure of energy performance
of buildings constructed with state funds. However, funding constraints have impeded implemented by DOA’s Office of
Facility Planning and Control. With immediate emission reductions that can be actualized, this action proposes that
the state allocate funding in the near-term for DOA’s implementation of Act 1184 and development of a system for
benchmarking the energy performance of public buildings in Louisiana. This benchmarking system would use a
life-cycle analysis methodology to calculate the carbon impacts from construction, materials, and operations over time.
This system can be used to guide scoping, design, and procurement, but also in evaluating the carbon impacts of
retrofits compared to a new build alternative. Once developed, the energy benchmarking system could also be
used by state subdivisions, parishes, and municipalities in the medium- and long-term as a guide for developing their
own initiatives, such as the St. Tammany Healthy Resilient Buildings Initiative, that can realize energy cost savings and
improved air quality. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 50, 87, 104, 134, 161)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

85

ACTION 13.6 Update statewide building codes
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LSUCCC

Pursue building code updates through
the 2021-2022 revision process

Require minimum energy performance
standards of buildings

The Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council (LSUCCC) is tasked with reviewing and approving updates to the
state’s building code. The Louisiana Legislature has, in the past, directed the LSUCCC to review and adopt new codes,
such as the plumbing code. In the near-term, this action encourages the LSUCCC to complete the process of code
adoption that is underway and adopt stronger minimum energy performance standards and codes for Louisiana by July
1, 2022. If newer building codes were adopted, building projects could take advantage of the latest low-carbon materials
such as mass timber. In implementing this action, the Louisiana Legislature should also change the LSUCCC authorization
and require them to adopt the latest model codes (such as the residential I-Codes or the ASHRAE 90.1 energy code)
automatically as new versions are published, except if overridden by a majority vote of the LSUCCC. (Associated Submitted
Action Proposals: 75, 133, 50)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

86

Natural Working
Lands and Wetlands
This section includes three strategies to promote a
comprehensive approach to action for natural sinks.
Preservation and conservation of natural lands seek to
increase sequestration potential of Louisiana’s lands and
forests. Regenerative and sustainable agriculture practices
of working lands seeks to reduce emissions and enhance
sequestration of farming, ranching, and forestry lands.
Wetlands promote efforts of the Coastal Master Plan and
increased sequestration capacity of wetlands. Across these
three strategies, the section aims to maximize climate
mitigation
and
adaptation
goals
simultaneously,
understanding that resilience and flood risk must be
maximized in how Louisiana protects our lands for
sequestration potential and comprehensive ecosystem
benefits.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

• STRATEGY 14: Preserve and expand natural
lands and urban green spaces to maximize
climate mitigation and adaptation goals
• STRATEGY 15: Restore and conserve
Louisiana’s coastal wetlands to maximize
climate mitigation and adaptation goals
• STRATEGY 16. Support the sustainable
management and conservation of working
agricultural and forestry lands

87

Strategy 14. Preserve and expand natural lands and urban green spaces to
maximize climate mitigation and adaptation goals
Louisiana’s natural lands, from bottomland hardwood forests to urban green spaces, sequester
carbon while also providing multiple ecosystem services and playing an important role in statewide
resilience to the effects of climate change. The continuation and enhancement of these co-benefits
hinges on natural land and urban green space preservation, conservation, and expansion. The
actions within this strategy emphasize the importance of social equity in conservation planning to
ensure that co-benefits can be realized for all Louisianans and ecosystems.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Access to Healthy Ecosystems: Preservation and restoration of natural lands such as riparian buffers can
contribute to continued access to clean water and productive ecosystems that also support fishing and hunting
resources, both recreational and commercial. Natural lands are central to Louisiana’s cultural heritage, including
Indigenous cultures.

•

Reduced Environmental Disparities: Investments in urban green spaces and natural lands can directly benefit local
communities by increasing access to recreational amenities and reducing urban heat island effects through
shading building surfaces, deflecting radiation from the sun, and releasing oxygen. Thoughtfully focusing
investments in historically underserved communities can narrow existing socioeconomic disparities in access to
green space and its benefits.

ACTION 14.1 Assess and conserve Louisiana’s interior natural lands, prioritizing forested lands,
grasslands, floodplains, wetlands and riparian areas
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LDAF / land trusts / local government
/ private landowners

Assess a baseline of areas most in
need of conservation

30% conservation of interior natural
lands by 2030

This action sets a target for 30% of Louisiana’s interior natural lands be conserved or protected by 2030. This is a
reasonably ambitious target based on the data and information that we have to date; however, a comprehensive baseline
assessment of existing conserved and protected lands and areas to prioritize for conservation that maximize ecological,
hydrologic, and social co-benefits will be a critical first step towards meeting this target and refining it if necessary.
Because of the state’s flood risk, action should focus on forested land, floodplains, wetlands, and riparian areas that
provide critical hydrologic and watershed function and flood risk mitigation. In particular, preservation and active
stewardship of unmanaged, old-growth forested lands and of native or semi-native grasslands, savannas, and woodlands
offer a great opportunity for carbon sequestration and better land management in Louisiana. Priority areas should be
preserved through voluntary expansion of conservation servitudes and other conservation tools in partnership with
landowners, land trusts, conservation organizations, Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry (LDAF), Louisiana
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries (LDWF), and local government. This effort should be jumpstarted through existing
conservation plans, such as TNC’s Ecoregional Plans, LDWF’s State Wildlife Action Plan, and the White House’s “America
the Beautiful” Initiative. Conservation practices should consider and draw upon Traditional Ecological Knowledge, the
evolving knowledge acquired by Indigenous and local peoples over hundreds or thousands of years through direct

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

88

connection with the environment. This action should also ensure alignment with projects and models of flood risk from
the Coastal Master Plan and Louisiana Watershed Initiative. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 40, 68)

ACTION 14.2 Support the expansion of urban tree canopy and green spaces
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LDAF / parish and municipal
governments

Convene stakeholders of major urban
areas

30% conservation of interior natural
lands by 2030

Activities that reforest public areas in urban environments, increase urban green spaces (e.g., parks, gardens, farms),
and provide landscape-based stormwater management through green infrastructure can sequester carbon while also
reducing heat island effect, reducing localized flooding, and increasing access to open space. Further co-benefits are
reduced energy consumption and ongoing energy use due to a reduced heat island effect. This action proposes the state
government, through LDAF, serve as convenor of parish and municipal governments to develop and promote a coherent,
statewide approach that supports tree planting programs and maintenance in urban areas, particularly in historically
underserved communities. In addition to this statewide approach, this action should empower locals to survey existing
tree canopies in urban areas, with progress tracked and reported annually. Near-term deployment of a statewide
approach and local surveys of existing canopies should inform longer-term urban transportation projects. Specific focus
should be on increasing tree canopy and open space access in low-income, urban areas in both regional and local plans
(e.g., State Watershed Plan, Hazard Mitigation Plan, Comprehensive Plans). This action proposes that DOTD review and
update, as needed, its guidance for revegetating and planting along state-funded or managed roadways to maximize
potential for natural carbon sequestration and landscape-based stormwater runoff management. Guidelines should
include measures to improve urban tree canopy where sufficient road rights-of-way exist and where local maintenance
sponsors can be identified. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 2, 4, 44, 64, 68, 78)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

89

STRATEGY 15. Restore and conserve Louisiana’s coastal wetlands to maximize
climate mitigation and adaptation goals
As with Louisiana’s inland natural lands, our coastal wetlands sequester carbon and provide
important ecosystem services, while also serving a critical role in buffering against rising sea levels
and severe storms. Restoring and maintaining coastal wetlands for mitigation against these climate
change-related threats can benefit Louisiana’s vulnerable coastal communities and ecosystems, as
realized though implementation of Louisiana’s Coastal Master Plan. While sources of GHG emissions
are well characterized in the 2021 GHG Inventory, significant knowledge gaps remain related to
sequestration of carbon by the diverse ecosystems of Louisiana. Actions in this strategy include
mechanisms to fill knowledge gaps and improve the accuracy of our data on natural carbon sinks in
Louisiana.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Resilience to a Changing Environment: Investments in restoration and conservation planning can increase
community resilience to the threats of sea level rise and severe storms by providing a natural buffer to these
threats.

•

Cultural Heritage: The unique cultural heritage of South Louisiana is intrinsically tied to the natural environment of
the coast, highlighting the need to protect environments important to traditional living cultures, including
Indigenous cultures and traditional fishing communities. Project-by-project considerations are important for
understanding how restoration projects impact cultural heritage.

•

Economy and Jobs: Louisiana’s coast is a working coast, with 20% of U.S. waterborne commerce coming through
our ports and coastal wetlands that provide important habitat for commercially important fish and game species.
Conservation and restoration of Louisiana’s coastal habitats is critical to both our local and national economy.

ACTION 15.1 Optimize the carbon sequestration potential of Louisiana’s coastal wetlands through
implementation of Coastal Master Plan projects
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

CPRA

Study carbon storage potential of
wetland projects

Maximize carbon sequestration of
coastal wetland restoration

Implementation of Louisiana’s Coastal Master Plan* includes coastal restoration
actions to reduce land loss with a focus on risk reduction to support coastal
communities. This action proposes that the Coastal Protection and Restoration
Authority (CPRA) incorporate climate mitigation goals and measures (e.g., carbon
sequestration potential of wetlands) into future iterations of the Coastal Master
Plan as well as into project design and prioritization. Carbon sequestration
potential should further make the case for investment in Louisiana’s coastal
program and unlock additional resources for project implementation. (Associated
Submitted Action Proposals: 77)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

*Louisiana’s Coastal
Master Plan
Louisiana’s Coastal Master
Plan, led by the Coastal
Protection and Restoration
Authority (CPRA), responds to
the loss of the state’s coastal
land through setting forth and
implementing projects that
build or maintain coastal
wetlands and reduce flood risk
for Louisiana communities.

90

ACTION 15.2 Quantify and monitor the potential coastal blue carbon in Louisiana habitats and Coastal
Master Plan projects
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

CPRA

Invest in assessments of net carbon
flux of coastal wetlands

Maximize carbon sequestration of
coastal wetland restoration

Quantification and monitoring to assess net carbon flux of Louisiana’s coastal wetland habitats (fresh,
intermediate/brackish, saline, and submerged aquatic vegetation; also known as coastal blue carbon) and open water
habitats is a crucial step towards building a robust carbon finance framework. Carbon financing presents an opportunity
for the state to partner with industry to expand coastal wetland restoration initiatives. Though a comprehensive
understanding of blue carbon requires long-term study, existing efforts should continue through: 1) research and
development led by the state, non-profits, the private sector, and/or academic institutions to create accurate models that
will allow quantification of Louisiana’s coastal blue carbon over time and across variable environmental conditions; and
2) expanded support and monitoring capacity of existing foundational monitoring programs (e.g., System Wide
Assessment and Monitoring Program (SWAMP) that includes the Coastwide Reference Monitoring System (CRMS)) to
quantify coastal blue carbon across coastal Louisiana over time. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 59, 60, 77)

ACTION 15.3 Develop crediting mechanism and market specific to blue carbon
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Universities / CPRA / blue carbon
experts and verifiers / coastal
ecologists

Collaborate with stakeholders to
design a carbon credit and market

Maximize investment in carbon
sequestration of wetland restoration

Existing carbon markets are designed primarily for terrestrial forests and have not readily accommodated crediting of
coastal wetlands. Specifically, standards for additionality and permanency must be tailored for dynamic coastal wetlands
to recognize and account for their GHG benefits while being grounded in the realities of those dynamic systems. The
natural carbon sequestration potential of Louisiana’s coastal habitats is too valuable to be entirely precluded from
market-based systems that can support the conservation and restoration of these important ecosystems. With the
assistance of blue carbon experts, carbon verifiers, and coastal ecologists, Louisiana should evaluate the longevity of
coastal carbon pools, the design and market interest for the creation of a specialized carbon credit, and the market
specific to Louisiana’s coastal wetland habitats. This potential Louisiana credit and market would more directly take into
account the sequestration potential of coastal wetland habitats as well as the shorter time scales that conservation or
restoration efforts would be expected to offer given the dynamic nature of deltaic systems. This credit and market would
attempt to match the local and global demand for natural carbon credits with the urgent need to protect and restore
Louisiana’s wetland ecosystems for the preservation of the state’s culture, communities, economy, and environment.
(Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 59, 60, 77)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, opposing the sale of coastal wetlands as offsets for
continued GHG pollution. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

91

STRATEGY 16. Support the sustainable management and conservation of
working agricultural and forestry lands
Agriculture and forestry are a large component of Louisiana’s economic prosperity as a state and
requires intentional management to curtail and sequester GHG emissions. Best management
practices and adoption of new technologies can help Louisiana reduce emissions from land practices
while restoring natural ecosystems and biodiversity. Adoption of such practices will benefit from rural
and urban focus, where equitable access for all farmers and foresters to such practices and
technologies can be continued through conservation implementation programs and enhanced
through grants and research programs. Actions within this strategy emphasize collaboration across
all stakeholders and agencies to support the transition of Louisiana’s farmers to adopting less GHGintensive agricultural and forestry practices.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Public Health and Safety: Agricultural best management practices can reduce nutrient runoff and improve water
quality leading to lower incidences of harmful algal blooms, higher food and fiber productivity and enhanced local
ecosystems.

•

Community Engagement and Participation: Stakeholder engagement is critical in encouraging voluntary adoption of
new practices and technology that better manage and increase the carbon sequestration potential in Louisiana’s
agricultural and forestry lands. Implementation of this strategy must consider engagement at multiple scales and
through multiple mechanisms to communicate benefits of transitioning toward practices enabling lower GHG
emissions and accelerated soil carbon sequestration.

•

Strengthening Louisiana’s Economy: Sustainable use of working lands leads to healthier soils, which promote longterm management and greater longevity of production. Moreover, encouraging Louisiana’s investment in its own
consumption of Louisiana-derived agricultural and forestry products will provide further strength to the state’s
economy while reducing GHG emissions.

ACTION 16.1 Establish a Louisiana Conservation Innovation Program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

USDA / LDAF

Leverage USDA investment for
innovative practices

Encourage conservation practices
that sequester carbon

Founded on the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Conservation Innovation Grant Program, many states have
established Conservation Innovation Programs to incite creativity and promote development of innovative conservation
practices uniquely tailored to benefit the state. This action proposes creation of a Louisiana Conservation Innovation
Program within the LDAF to stimulate development and adoption of innovative conservation approaches and technologies
that curtail and sequester GHG emissions. Research institutions, farmers, agencies, and others will be able to submit
innovative conservation approaches in the program. Through partnering with USDA and others, the LDAF will request
funding to promote pilot projects, field demonstrations, and on-farm conservation research for the development and
testing of innovative practices specific to Louisiana. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 42, 110)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

92

ACTION 16.2 Support the transition to regenerative agriculture and forestry practices
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

USDA-NRCS / SWCDs / LDAF

Convene farmers, ranchers, and
foresters to identify barriers

Increase access to regenerative
agriculture and forestry practices

Transition to regenerative agriculture* and forestry practices is essential to minimize
the agricultural sector’s use of fossil-fuel based equipment, to maximize agricultural
sequestration potential of best management practices, and to promote healthy soils
Regenerative agriculture is a
and ecosystems. However, many barriers impede widespread transition. This action
system of farming principles and
practices
that
seeks
to
proposes that, in the short-term, LDAF and local Soil and Water Conservation Districts
rehabilitate and enhance farm
(SWCDs) continue to convene focus groups of farmers, ranchers, and foresters to
ecosystems by emphasizing soil
health,
water
management,
identify barriers to adoption of various conservation practices and identify opportunities
fertilizer use, less GHG-intensive
and solutions to overcome those challenges. As consensus is built around impediments
equipment, and other best
management practices.
to adoption of regenerative agriculture and forestry conservation practices 18.2 LDAF,
SWCDs, and the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) should
collaborate to develop a competitive grant program that offers technical and financial assistance to landowners that
guide and support transition and lower barriers to on-farm conservation practices. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals:
88)

*Regenerative Agriculture

1

ACTION 16.3 Expand implementation of on-farm conservation plans
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

USDA-NRCS / SWCDs / Landowners

Advocate for further on-farm
conservation funding

Increase access to regenerative
agriculture and forestry practices

On-farm conservation plans have had the most success in transitioning farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners to
implementing conservation practices. The Louisiana Conservation Delivery Program, a partnership of the USDA NRCS
and local SWCDs with individual landowners, is responsible for development of voluntary on-farm conservation plans of
sustainable practices through enhancing and conserving soil, water, and related natural resources. This action proposes
uplifting this successful collaboration and program through advocating for expansion of federal and state funding. With
more funding, the program should incorporate and fund the current backlog of eligible conservation program applications
and enable more eligible working land tracts to be enrolled into conservation plans. (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 38, 39)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

93

ACTION 16.4 Measure carbon sequestration potential of conservation farming and forestry best
management practices
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Universities / LDAF / DEQ

Study ability of BMPs to reduce and
sequester GHG emissions

Encourage conservation practices
that sequester carbon

Best management practices (BMPs) are central in the transition to regenerative and conservation farming and forestry,
and on-site emission reduction and carbon sequestration quantification technologies must be made widely available and
should continuously advance. This action tasks Louisiana’s research institutions to study, monitor, and publish data on
the co-benefits and impacts of BMPs to abate GHG emissions, improve soil and water quality, improve natural
ecosystems, and sequester carbon. We recommend this study begin immediately so that results can be incorporated into
best management practices and on-farm and on-forest conservation programs implemented. (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 34)

ACTION 16.5 Establish an urban agriculture and conservation program in the LDAF
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LDAF / SWCDs

Develop an urban agriculture and
conservation program

Increase urban access to regenerative
agriculture and forestry practices

As expressed in prior actions, LDAF currently offers a variety of approaches to conservation through partnerships,
programs, and projects through its Office of Soil and Water Conservation and SWCDs. To build on this extensive work and
bring more stakeholders to the conservation conversation, this action proposes the development of an urban agriculture
and conservation program within the LDAF to ensure adoption of regenerative and sustainable practices across all
Louisiana landscapes. The proposed program should provide educational resources, workforce development and
training, marketing assistance, and grant support for farmers, landowners, foresters, and other stakeholders in urban
areas. We recommend near-term creation of this program to ensure a comprehensive and inclusive approach to
conservation across Louisiana. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 88)

ACTION 16.6 Establish regional compost facilities and accompanying local programs
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LDEQ / LDAF

Collaborate on strategic design and
locations of compost facilities

Increase access to regenerative
agriculture practices

Composting is an effective waste and GHG reduction measure that diverts organic materials from landfills and
incinerators and converts those materials into valuable fertilizer to replenish and stabilize the soil. LDAF already
implements an Agriculture Solid Waste BMP Program. This action proposes LDEQ and LDAF partner to encourage

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

94

backyard composting of yard and food waste for homeowners and restaurants, designate regional compost facilities,
promote compost as a solid waste BMP, and partner with parish- and municipal-level compost programs. LDEQ should
designate and fund regional compost facilities with methane waste recovery technology in partnership with local entities,
and LDAF should work with farmers to promote on-farm compost. Near-term implementation of these actions will increase
the viability of local compost programs and community gardens that further promote sustainable and local
agriculture, providing resources to underserved and overburdened communities. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals:
154, 158, 159, 160)

ACTION 16.7 Encourage sustainable forest management and greater use of Louisiana forest products
for construction
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LFA / LDAF / DOA / LED

Convene major foresters for
educational sessions

Increase access to regenerative
forestry practices

Markets for wood products create incentives for landowners to plant more trees and better manage forests, resulting in
more carbon sequestered. Educating landowners on and establishing sustainable forestry practices maximizes carbon
sequestration of forested lands, encourages participation in carbon markets, and enhances early succession benefits
and realized co-benefits to ecosystems and species. Further, implementation of a Buy Clean Louisiana policy (Action 6.1)
will encourage and require manufacturers and end users to purchase sustainably forested products in construction and
consumer products, increasing the amount of carbon stored by trees. This action proposes LDAF’s Forestry Protection
Program and the Louisiana Forestry Association (LFA) partner to educate major foresters on the sustainable management
of forests and the necessary steps to engage in existing carbon markets. DOA and LED should also encourage use of
Louisiana forest products — lumber, plywood, paper, wood pellets, and biomass — in state capital projects and other
construction projects. Cognizant of Louisiana’s forestry resources and markets, it is recommended that outreach to
foresters, manufacturers, and end users begin immediately for this transition to be effective. (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 26, 31, 67)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, opposing the inclusion of wood pellets as a climate solution
and raising concern over its environmental and climate impacts. DISSENTER: Pichon Battle.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

NATURAL WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS

95

An Inclusive, LowCarbon Economy
Three strategies and eight actions detail key
components
of
an
inclusive,
low-carbon
economy that
supports
and
promotes
clean energy development and transition. This
section focuses on how Louisiana workers and
businesses are centered in the transition through
accessibility of education and resources to
retrain. Education, research, and innovation are
another necessary focus of this section and
actions take steps to coordinate research, train the
next generation of citizens and workers, and
enhance partnerships with unions and the private
sector.
Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

• STRATEGY 17: Build a more inclusive and
resilient economy for all Louisiana residents
• STRATEGY 18: Strengthen climate
education, research, and innovation as a
focus of Louisiana’s energy transition
• STRATEGY 19: Prioritize Louisiana workers
and businesses in the transition to a lowcarbon economy

96

STRATEGY 17. Build a more inclusive and resilient economy for all Louisiana
residents
Deliberate action is necessary to ensure that all Louisianans have equitable access to future
economic opportunities and that any disruptions to the economy associated with the energy
transition do not fall disproportionately on any one community. By prioritizing the success of those
who have historically been excluded from the benefits of prior economic transitions and those who
are most directly affected by the energy transition, the shift to a low-carbon economy can more
broadly, inclusively, and equitably provide benefits throughout the state.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

•

Supporting historically marginalized groups: Targeted effort to address historical and ongoing inequities is more
likely to lead to positive outcomes for the clean energy transition and for historically marginalized communities
and residents, including communities of color and Indigenous peoples.
Strengthening the economy: By proactively providing training and opportunities, Louisiana can ensure that
people and communities historically left out of previous economic booms can be part of building Louisiana’s
clean energy future.

ACTION 17.1 Establish a Louisiana Plan for Economic Transition
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LED / LWC / Louisiana Technical and
Community College System

Convene stakeholders to develop
vision and ambition for the transition
plan

Support Louisiana agencies,
industries, and workers in energy
transition

This action proposes the establishment of a Louisiana Plan for Economic Transition to help provide strategic direction
and support to the state, workers, and small businesses as they manage overlapping economic transitions. This planning
effort should conduct research and develop a statewide and regional strategies for addressing the transitions resulting
from globalization and trade disruptions, rapid technological shifts such as increased automation, changes to fossil fuel
prices and demand, global efforts to decarbonize the energy sector, and other challenges resulting from climate change.
The Plan for Economic Transition should build upon the state’s existing strengths while considering opportunities for
economic development that diversify the Louisiana economy and encourage growth in low-carbon industries like
renewable energy. It should identify or propose educational and training opportunities and programs to support and grow
Louisiana’s workforce with tailored assistance for current workers in the energy industry and for communities that have
been historically marginalized or excluded from participating in economic advancement. This action would be a joint effort
by LED, the Board of Regents, regional economic development organizations, the Louisiana Technical and Community
College System, and the LWC. Together, these entities would help promote and attract new economic opportunities to
the state while also preparing workers for emerging opportunities related to the low-carbon economy of the future.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE LOW-CARBON, ECONOMY

97

STRATEGY 18. Strengthen climate education, research, and innovation as a focus of
Louisiana’s energy transition
To build climate leadership throughout the state, it is critical that Louisiana allocates the funding and
resources necessary to build and coordinate climate education programs across the state, facilitate
better collaboration among research institutions that specialize in climate change mitigation and
adaptation, and prepare Louisiana for national and international level research opportunities.
Education, at all levels, and applied research are the foundation of a more inclusive, low-carbon
economy and are critical to ensuring that the next generation is prepared, resilient, and innovative
when facing future climate threats.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Economy and Jobs: The national and global focus on climate change and reduction of GHG emissions will present
numerous opportunities for researchers, innovators, and practitioners to apply climate-related expertise in
locations outside of Louisiana and bring revenue and opportunities to the state.

•

Increasing the Likelihood of Success: Many promising technologies to reduce net GHG emissions reductions,
particularly from industrial sectors that form key parts of the Louisiana economy, have yet to be fully developed
or applied at scale. Research and development to advance GHG reduction solutions is vital to achieving success
as a low-carbon economy.

ACTION 18.1 Establish a Research Practitioner Partnership (RPP) Program to support climate education
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Department of Education

Develop climate curricula and
projects for K-12 education

Center climate education in K-12
classrooms

This action, enabled through the Louisiana Department of Education STEM Team and the LA
STEM Council, proposes a Research Practitioner Partnership (RPP) Program*, led by the
Louisiana Department of Education, to provide dedicated, yearly funding and support for K-12
climate education projects and development of curricula implemented by educators,
researchers, practitioners, industry, and policy makers. Expansion of climate education is a
critical step towards ensuring that the next generation is prepared, resilient, and innovative
when facing future climate threats. This action recommends the Department of Education begin
conversations with the LA STEM Council to build a framework for climate education with longterm ambition to establish the RPP Program followed by schools across Louisiana in K-12
education. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 54)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

*RPP Program
A Research Practitioner
Partnership (RPP) is a
long-term and mutuallybeneficial partnership
between researchers
and practitioners in the
workforce, intended to
better align ongoing
research
with
the
needs of surrounding
communities.

98

ACTION 18.2 Teach, re-train, and employ Louisiana residents in clean energy sectors
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LWC / Universities / Community
Colleges

Develop relevant education, training,
and re-training courses and curricula

Guarantee job training for workers in
energy transition

Training Louisiana workers is a critical step towards transitioning and growing the state’s local clean energy industry. This
action, enabled by the Louisiana Board of Regents and the Louisiana Workforce Commission (LWC), would create a
Climate Corps Program in the LWC for local community colleges and Louisiana universities to provide education, training,
and re-training necessary to support the growth of the renewable energy industry. This action would also encourage the
growth of rural jobs that take advantage of natural carbon sequestration, such as encouraging employment of foresters
and land managers who understand the best practices for natural carbon sequestration. Near-term leadership from the
LWC will enable training and career track transition programs in the form of four-year degrees, two-year degrees, and
industry certificate programs to be offered by universities and community colleges in the following areas: information
technology, electrical engineering, utility management, and alternative fuel vehicles (manufacturing, operations,
maintenance). (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 23,99, 137)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, citing opposition to the inclusion of non-renewable clean
energy and subsequent perpetuation of fossil fuel use and deployment of fossil-fuel based technology. DISSENTER:
Pichon Battle.

ACTION 18.3 Coordinate climate change mitigation and adaptation research needs across Louisiana’s
academic, public, and private institutions
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

The Water Institute of the Gulf

Collaborate with universities to
identify existing climate-related work
and research gaps

Support Louisiana universities in
energy transition

Louisiana’s extensive research institution and university networks offer widespread expertise well-suited to inform
climate action. Many research institutions are already investing in and undertaking research related to various aspects
of climate action, though this research and development is often not coordinated. This action proposes centralized
coordination of climate action across the public, private, and academic networks. Immediate action should be taken by
the Water Institute, designated as the state’s Innovation and Collaboration Hub, to inventory interdisciplinary
climate research capabilities across the state and provide a broad understanding of existing in-state expertise in
climate action to the Governor’s Office. Following completion of this inventory, the Water Institute should launch
a partnership program to serve as the coordinating unit that convenes institutions to identify state research needs,
discuss emerging work, and partner across universities on grant and project proposals that seek to understand existing
emissions and emission reduction measures. Partners of this program would meet semi-annually beginning in 2023 to
coordinate ongoing work and identify emerging opportunities for research, development, and demonstration or pilot
projects for the state. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

99

STRATEGY 19. Prioritize Louisiana workers and businesses in the transition to a lowcarbon economy
For Louisiana to successfully shift to a low-carbon economy, the state must invest in the training and
preparation that Louisiana workers need to build and maintain clean energy infrastructure and find
opportunities in other industries and sectors as the economy retools. This will require targeted
training and re-training initiatives, a strong commitment to the development of renewables industries,
and the creation of proactive programs that ensure the successful transition of oil and gas workers
to job placements in clean energy and beyond.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Supporting the Workforce: The state of Louisiana is likely to see shifts in the types of industries providing
employment opportunities for workers, particularly those with varying educational backgrounds. Workers can
benefit from the transition to a low-carbon economy through targeted training that will equip them with the highdemand skill sets needed to deploy the strategies laid out in this plan.

•

Strengthening the Economy: By ensuring that Louisianans have the knowledge and skill sets needed to support
building and maintaining the infrastructure needed to reduce net GHG emissions, this transition can serve as an
economic driver and attract future investment into the state.

ACTION 19.1 Promote and invest in Louisiana-based low-carbon industries, including specialized
worker training and long-term economic development planning to recruit, develop, and retain firms and
workers
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LED / LWC /Louisiana Community
and Technical College System

Invest in Louisiana-based low-carbon
industry through tax incentives

Support Louisiana industries in
energy transition

Louisiana has many programs and investments in place to promote the existing energy industry that could be modeled
or retooled to promote and invest in emerging low-carbon opportunities such as renewable energy, coastal blue carbon,
low- and no-carbon hydrogen, and low-carbon fuels. For example, the technical needs of solar power generation can be
different at the utility scale than the distributed scale. However, with the proper training, a worker could be qualified to
work on either installation thereby improving the likelihood of maintaining steady work across utility and distributed
projects. This action recommends a combination of legislative and executive actions by LED, regional economic
development organizations, the Board of Regents, the Louisiana Community and Technical College System, and the LWC
to adjust and propose tax incentives, worker training programs, and determine other ways to speed and smooth the
transformation of the state’s energy systems, workforce, and economy. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 23, 61, 93)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Three members objected to this action, with two members objecting to the inclusion of “lowcarbon hydrogen” and one member objecting to agency-focused implementation. DISSENTERS: Pichon Battle,
Daniels, Verchick.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

100

ACTION 19.2 Establish and expand entrepreneurial and jobs programs in under-resourced communities
to meet the needs of the energy transition
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LED

Prioritize investment in
disadvantaged business enterprises
and communities

Support underserved communities in
energy transition

If the energy transition is to reach communities most impacted by climate change and disinvestment, Louisiana should
extend the physical reach of entrepreneurial and workforce training programs specifically to these communities.
Implementation of this action includes extending existing offices and programs, like the Small Business Assistance
Centers run by the LED, to all communities and expanding new services specific to the energy transition for all
communities (e.g., Rapid Response teams, Action 19.3 ). This action recommends LED identify and plan targeted
outreach opportunities to assist disadvantaged business enterprises with state and federal procurement, alongside
identifying business development opportunities for small businesses and workers in these communities. A combination
of community- and business-based outreach will help ensure access to and widespread benefit from investments in
renewable energy and other aspects of the energy transition. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)

ACTION 19.3 Enhance the Louisiana Workforce Commission’s Rapid Response services to anticipate
and provide tailored support to oil and gas and related workers facing job displacement and layoffs
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LWC

Assist transitioning workers through
Rapid Response teams

Support displaced workers in energy
transition

Louisiana has lost thousands of jobs in oil and gas over the last decade, and as the energy transition accelerates, it is
inevitable that additional workers in this industry will face layoffs. To make sure that these workers are supported and
assisted, this action proposes the enhancement of the Louisiana Workforce Commission’s Rapid Response* teams to
anticipate and provide specific support and services for those facing job losses and
*Rapid Response Teams
facility closures. These Rapid Response teams should partner with the workers and their
families, ensuring that the workers receive unemployment benefits, support services,
Rapid Response is an early
intervention
outplacement
and that relevant training or new job opportunities are identified. Louisiana’s oil and gas
service, offered to workers
workers are skilled and valued, and the state should proactively work to place them in
affected by major layoffs and
plant closing and intended to
new high-quality jobs where their skills can be used, even if not every worker can
inform affected employees on
transition to the renewable energy industry. This action instructs the LWC to review its
how to access services.
existing Rapid Response programming and make improvements so that energy workers
and their families are better served throughout a changing energy and economic landscape. (Associated Submitted Action
Proposals: 153)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

101

ACTION 19.4 Establish partnerships with Louisiana educational and non-profit institutions, businesses,
and unions to better guarantee job placements for workers in low-carbon training programs
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

LWC / non-profits / businesses /
unions

Convene stakeholder groups for
coordinated job placement

Guarantee job placement in energy
transition workforce

Enrolling in a training or educational program can mean lost time, taking on personal expense, and missed wages. Still
riskier is the chance that there will be no jobs available at the end of the program. This action creates partnerships
between educational and non-profit institutions, businesses, and unions to better guarantee job placements for
graduates of training programs in low-carbon sectors so that workers know and see that their investment to gain new
skills is worth the risk. Closer coordination and improved job placements will increase the number of workers enrolled
and completing training programs in clean energy and other fields needed for the energy transition and necessary for the
successful implementation of all actions in this strategy and in Action 17.1. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

102

Collaboration and
Partnerships to
Ensure Successful
Implementation
Partnerships
are
central
in
successful
implementation of Louisiana’s Climate Action Plan.
This section broadly outlines the alignment and
coordination necessary for meaningful progress
towards emission reduction targets, noting
stakeholders and their unique roles in collaboration
and implementation. Key stakeholders identified in
the portfolio are federal, state, and local
governments; the private sector; and communities,
particularly those historically disadvantaged, and
Indigenous peoples.

• STRATEGY 20. Ensure Louisiana is prepared
to maximize potential federal funding
opportunities
• STRATEGY 21. Position Louisiana as a climate
leader by engaging in national and regional
dialogues and planning
• STRATEGY 22. Align climate action
approaches across state government
• STRATEGY 23. Coordinate action with local
government
• STRATEGY 24. Call upon the private sector to
align their practices and play a leading role in
climate action
• STRATEGY 25. Improve engagement with and
track progress on outcomes for
disadvantaged communities and Indigenous
peoples

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS TO ENSURE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION

103

STRATEGY 20. Ensure Louisiana is prepared to maximize potential federal
funding opportunities
With passage of the 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, numerous federal opportunities exist in the coming
years for increased funding for climate mitigation and resilience initiatives across all sectors of the economy and
benefitting all of the Task Force’s fundamental objectives. Louisiana’s efforts to utilize allocated funding and to compete
for available federal resources should be coordinated across agencies to maximize the potential for success and the
realization of goals and values established in this Climate Action Plan. This coordination should be led through the Office
of the Governor with leadership and input from departments identified as eligible applicants or recipients. Federal funding
is imperative for Louisiana's successful transition to a low-carbon economy, so Louisiana must be proactive in advocating
for increased federal support, including but not limited to the following priority areas:

•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Converting public fleets and heavy-duty vehicles to zero-emission vehicles and the buildout of electric
vehicle infrastructure (SA# 158, 162, 29, 27, 36, 137)
Plugging, remediating, and reclaiming orphaned wells (SA# 166, 167, 168)
Expanding monitoring of methane and other GHGs (SA# 91, 151)
Measuring, monitoring, and enhancing natural wetland carbon sequestration (SA# 59, 60)
Pre-disaster mitigation and community-focused resilience (SA# 152)
45Q tax credits for industrial carbon capture and sequestration (SA# 109, 120, 121)
45Q-equivalent tax credits for industrial electrification
Hydrogen Hubs and Direct Air Capture Hubs
Accelerating offshore wind development in Louisiana (SA# 61, 101)
Attracting and retaining clean energy industries and investments (SA# 29)
Investing in energy efficiency improvements and weatherization programs (SA#119, 162, 16, 177)
Expanding programs that assist workers displaced by climate or energy transitions (SA# 153, 23)
Advocating for a streamlined federal acknowledgement process for Louisiana tribes
Investing in statewide broadband (SA# 25)
Sustainable and regenerative agriculture, forestry, and soil management

Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Reducing the Cost of Transition: Federal funding can offset some of the costs of a transition to a low carbon
economy, reducing the state and private investment needed to implement the strategies and actions contained in
this plan.

•

Quality of Life: Federal programs can help catalyze the broader social, economic, and health benefits associated
with the strategies and actions of the Louisiana Climate Plan, such as the reduction of pollution when vehicles are
electrified and the capping of orphan methane wells.

•

Ensuring Effectiveness and Durability: Positioning Louisiana to capitalize on Federal resources expands the
resources available to support plan implementation into the future.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS TO ENSURE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION

104

STRATEGY 21. Position Louisiana as a climate leader by engaging in national
and regional dialogues and planning
Partnerships are essential to make meaningful progress towards Louisiana’s targets. Regional partners are necessary to
advance carbon pricing systems, electricity transmission planning, offshore wind development, regional transit
connectivity, and climate adaptation. This strategy recommends that Louisiana initiate and participate in discussions with
other states to: a) establish a regional, if not national, cap-and-trade or carbon tax program, b) intentionally plan for the
expansion of electrified transmission infrastructure and offshore wind development, c) strategize transit connectivity
between interstate communities, and d) set goals for building climate resilience with states facing similar threats.
Regional partnerships are essential to reduce incidence of carbon leakage and to ensure states collaborate in working
towards similar goals. However, state-level action is not sufficient alone to lead economy-wide transitions. Local and
national partners are also essential to secure funding and ensure support for the state’s goals and to pilot nationally
significant initiatives that move the country towards carbon neutrality. In addition to federal priorities mentioned in
Strategy 20, this strategy also recommends Louisiana pursue interstate and intercity partnerships and the sharing of
lessons learned from other states and cities.

Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Ensuring Effectiveness and Durability: Through proactive engagement with federal and state partners, Louisiana
can help shape the discussion on the national stage to support strategies and actions that require federal policy
shifts—or infrastructure updates—for successful implementation.

•

Strengthening the Economy: Louisiana can become a leader in a global transition to a low-carbon economy.
Engagement and leadership at the regional and national scale can help ensure that the potential economic
benefits of state leadership are realized, such as the development of infrastructure for transmission of renewable
energy generated within and offshore of Louisiana.

STRATEGY 22. Align climate action approaches across state government
A whole-of-government approach across Louisiana is necessary to advance state emission reduction actions. The
Governor’s Office will encourage cross-agency collaboration and alignment, the setting of climate-related goals within
individual agencies, and the strengthening of partnerships with local government, communities, and Indigenous peoples
to carry out actions that cross and extend beyond agency jurisdictions. As key implementers of this Climate Action Plan,
state agencies must maintain alignment and function as a coordinated unit for climate action to be successful. The
Governor’s Office will also seek to collaborate with other state entities such as the PSC, LDAF, and the Louisiana
Legislature.

Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Timely Implementation: Through close coordination of state agencies, the strategies and actions of the Climate
Action Plan can be implemented as quickly and efficiently as possible, resulting in faster realization of benefits for
the people of the state.

•

Durability and Long-Term Success: The net GHG emission reduction strategies and actions in this plan span across
sectors that are supported or regulated by multiple state agencies. Close coordination of those agencies ensures
that new policies, incentives, and regulations are complementary and effective in reducing net GHG emissions and
providing other benefits to Louisiana, while also streamlining implementation.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS TO ENSURE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION

105

STRATEGY 23. Coordinate action with local governments
Local governments are significant collaborators and implementers of climate action within their jurisdictions. State
partners must work alongside local government to encourage local climate action planning that complements Louisiana’s
Climate Action Plan, reduces emissions locally, enhances economic activities, and advances equity around local concerns
as climate mitigation activities are implemented. Alongside engagement with communities on climate change emissions,
parishes and municipalities will work to build community awareness, enhance safety, identify sufficient funding, and
collectively implement equitable disaster planning and recovery across the rural to urban gradient.

Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Enhancing the Local Benefits of Climate Action: Active engagement of local government can help ensure that
individual communities fully realize the potential economic, societal, and health co-benefits of a low-carbon
economy transition.

•

Increasing Public Trust: The close ties that local government has within the community provide the most direct
connection to the people of Louisiana and therefore the most effective avenues of enhancing community outreach
and engagement.

STRATEGY 24. Call upon the private sector to align their practices and play a
leading role in climate action
Businesses are crucial partners for developing innovative and technical solutions to reduce emissions and critical sources
of resources to meet environmental goals. The Governor’s Office and state partners must work with and engage in
continuous solution-building with the private sector and regulated utilities to implement the actions set forth in this
Climate Action Plan. This should be done through direct engagement with business leaders to support mutually beneficial
steps toward climate action and by the establishment of an entity capable of leveraging public and private dollars for the
implementation of climate mitigation and adaptation initiatives, such as a Resilience Fund. Similar institutions around
the country have been used to provide bridge loans for renewable energy projects and energy efficiency retrofits, direct
financing for community solar, and credit enhancement to increase the willingness of private actors to provide capital for
resilience projects.

Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Strengthening the Economy: Louisiana-based technological and industrial solutions necessary for successful
implementation of multiple actions within the Climate Action Plan can be marketed and deployed nationally and
globally.

•

Enabling Timely Implementation: Technological innovation is vital for reducing net GHG emissions from the
industrial sector. Given the high percentage of emissions that result from industrial processes within the state, the
timeliness of success is closely tied to the development of effective solutions by the private sector.

•

Facilitating Implementation: Leveraging public dollars to attract private investments through a specialized entity,
like a Resilience Fund, can expand the number and types of projects that can be implemented and the speed of
realized benefits from the implementation of climate mitigation actions.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS TO ENSURE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION

106

STRATEGY 25. Improve engagement with and track progress on outcomes for
disadvantaged communities and Indigenous peoples
Disadvantaged communities and Indigenous peoples must be at the center of collaboration and partnership in the
development and implementation of climate action. In next steps of implementation, this strategy tasks the Task
Force with ensuring actions set forth in this Climate Action Plan create new opportunities for and benefits to
disadvantaged communities and Indigenous peoples, particularly those historically marginalized, those who face
disproportionate climate impacts, and those of low-to-moderate income. While next steps are being implemented, this
strategy tasks the Task Force with enabling and encouraging communities and Indigenous peoples to engage in
knowledge sharing, solution building, and decision making. This action further tasks the Governor’s Office and state
agencies with investing in the sustained two-way communication of needs and progress with Indigenous peoples and
marginalized communities.
This approach to engagement can be seen specifically in Actions within this plan, such as Actions 13.1 (Retrofitting
Buildings and Homes), 18.2 (Clean Energy Job Training), 19.2 and 19.4 (Targeting Job Placements and Energy Transition
Opportunities), and 26.3 (Incorporating Environmental Justice into Statewide Siting Planning). The outreach and
community consultation within these Actions will be a starting point for engagement that centers these communities in
the state’s climate plan implementation. Further, all actions should respect tribal treaty rights and similar tribal rights.
Though these actions set forth ambition, tracking outcomes is paramount to make meaningful progress on communitycentered approaches and engagement in climate actions. Effective quantitative metrics of the distribution of resources,
or the prevalence of inequality – such as the rate of distribution of poverty or of the GINI coefficient – alongside metrics
of health, housing, and education must be explored and used as tools to track implementation of climate actions and
include in annual progress reports.

Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
• Supporting Historically Marginalized Groups: Meaningful engagement of—and leadership by—disadvantaged
communities and Indigenous peoples is critical for achieving widespread success and equitable outcomes of a low
carbon transition.
•

Preservation of Culture and Cultural Resources: Indigenous people and communities have the greatest
understanding and ties to cultural resources, and incorporating their input into action implementation will help
ensure that the rich cultural history of the state is preserved.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS TO ENSURE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION

107

Accountability and
Adaptability to Ensure
Lasting Success
This final section contains two strategies that will ensure the •
long-term success of the state’s climate mitigation efforts.
Through longevity of the Task Force and a dedicated staff, the
Climate Action Plan strategies can be effectively and transparently
implemented. Long-term monitoring of GHG emissions will be a •
top priority to ensure the state is on track to meet GHG reduction
goals. As investments in new technology become more feasible
and models change, the GHG inventory and Climate Action Plan
must also be updated so that Louisiana’s climate actions are •
based on the best available science and are responsive to
changes in the marketplace and conditions here on the ground

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

STRATEGY 26. Advance an equitable, efficient,
and sustainable siting and permitting process for
new energy and infrastructure projects
STRATEGY 27. Ensure that Climate Action Plan
strategies are effectively and transparently
implemented
STRATEGY 28. Track progress in reducing net
GHG emissions reductions and adapt the
approaches taken as needed

108

STRATEGY 26. Advance an equitable, efficient, and sustainable siting and
permitting process for new energy and infrastructure projects
Implementation of this plan will require the modification of existing energy infrastructure and the
construction of new energy and infrastructure projects, such as renewable energy generation (e.g.,
solar farming, offshore wind), expanded electricity transmission infrastructure, vehicle charging
stations and energy storage, and CCUS facilities and pipelines. Our state's siting and permitting
processes must be updated to ensure that new projects are safely and equitably developed. Meeting
our climate goals will also require revisiting Louisiana’s existing practices and regulations that guide
the development of new and expanded industrial facilities. This strategy aims to ensure that new
projects align with Louisiana’s climate action goals, mitigate adverse impacts to communities and
environments now and into the future, and incorporate environmental justice considerations.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Human and Environmental Health: Amending permitting and siting regulations to reflect Louisiana’s emission
reduction targets will mitigate impacts to air quality throughout the state. Additionally, the development of new
permitting and siting processes that prioritize environmental justice and consider the needs of marginalized
communities that have been disproportionately impacted by pollution-related health impacts will improve public
health outcomes.

•

Community Engagement: Community input into revised permitting and siting practices is necessary to ensure
the updated processes are equitable and sensitive to the needs of groups who have historically been
marginalized.

•

Timely Implementation, Durability, and Long-Term Success. Updating permitting and siting processes to be more
streamlined enables the fastest implementation of actions requiring new infrastructure. At the same time,
aligning those processes to support net-GHG emission reductions and other objectives associated increases the
likelihood of long-term success.

ACTION 26.1 Increase the resources and staffing capacity of participating state agencies to plan for,
oversee, and monitor the deployment of new clean energy technologies and infrastructure
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature / DOA

Invest increased resources in
agencies implementing the Action
Plan

Maximize effective implementation of
the Action Plan

DNR’s jurisdiction over utility-scale solar and wind energy on state lands and water bottoms makes the agency central in
deployment of clean energy in Louisiana. This action recommends DNR guide the development of a process to assess,
monitor, and make regulatory determinations on development of CCS, CCUS, and clean/renewable energy infrastructure
technologies (e.g., solar farming, transmission lines, offshore wind). Specifically related to CCS and CCUS, a new and
unique set of research and technology needs have been identified for DNR alongside monitoring needs from DEQ. Prior
to the permitting of any projects, this action requires an internal audit of the deploying agency to ensure that it is
adequately funded and prepared to assess, monitor, and make regulatory determinations for the specific project (e.g.,

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

109

related to geologic storage in the development and maintenance of CCS well sites). This action also supports increased
capacity of DNR and DEQ to monitor potential air quality impacts, leaks at CCS well sites, complications of underground
storage, and others. Since proposed clean and renewable energy infrastructure projects currently are undergoing the
permitting process, this action proposes state funding be allocated to DNR and DEQ in the near term.
(Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)

ACTION 26.2 Solicit a study to more comprehensively understand potential impacts of CCUS technology
and infrastructure on communities, ecosystems, and cultural resources to inform siting and permitting
deployment
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Universities / DNR

Prioritize federal and state research
funding for CCUS impact analysis

Maximize effective implementation of
the Climate Action Plan

With Louisiana’s extensive geologic storage potential and federal incentives for near-term investment, Louisiana is seeing
significant interest and investment in the deployment of CCUS to address industrial GHG emissions. Members of the Task
Force and the public have raised concerns related to the capture process at facilities, transport through pipelines, and
geologic storage underground. To address these concerns, this action recommends the state, through leadership of DNR,
and its research institutions synthesize existing research on CCUS and disseminate information and materials for public
education. The state and its research institutions should also fund a comprehensive understanding of CCUS impacts,
including but not limited to siting impacts on cultural characteristics of neighboring populations, air quality impacts on
nearby communities, increased energy intensity for different industry processes, pipeline safety implications,
environmental and resilience impact of pipeline buildout, potential incidents of geologic storage, and long-term risks and
costs. (Associated Submitted Action Proposals: N/A)
DISSENTING VIEWS: Two members objected to this action, raising concerns that the deployment of CCUS is a foregone
conclusion and opposing the assumption that siting and permitting could have minimal impact. DISSENTERS:
Verchick, Manning-Broome.

ACTION 26.3 Collaboratively develop regulatory frameworks and statewide siting plans for new energy
technologies with considerations for both climate and environmental justice
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Governor’s Office / State Agencies

Establish an interagency working
group to develop pre-permitting
environmental siting analysis

Ensure safe and resilient siting of
energy infrastructure for the
environment and communities

For emerging energy generation and emissions reduction technologies in Louisiana (e.g., solar farming, offshore wind,
CCUS), there is opportunity to ground the permitting and siting frameworks around the Fundamental Objectives identified
in Louisiana’s Climate Action Plan. In anticipation of the significant investment in and deployment of large-scale low- or
no-carbon technologies, this action establishes an interagency working group that, with the benefit of robust public input
particularly from those who face disproportionate climate and environmental impacts, will engage in a prospective, pre-

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

110

permit siting analysis. One of the primary goals of this action is to ensure that future permitting and siting decisions for
the above-mentioned emerging technologies are consistent with the Fundamental Objectives of Louisiana’s Climate
Action Plan; address the potential impacts on and preferences of nearby communities, environmental impacts, and
environmental justice considerations; and are made with respect for tribal treaty rights. To the extent possible, this effort
would seek to identify areas where the necessary conditions (solar, atmospheric, geologic, and economic) for a given
technology are highest and the potential for conflicts or adverse impacts (health, environmental, economic) are lowest.
(Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 46, 92, 96)
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action because it does not include explicit requirements to follow
federal laws or declarations, such as Article VI of the United States Constitution or the American Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. DISSENTER: Parfait-Dardar.

ACTION 26.4 Update existing permitting and facility siting practices and regulations to align with
Louisiana’s emission reduction goals
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Governor’s Office / State Agencies

Establish an interagency working
group to review existing siting and
permitting procedures

Ensure safe and resilient siting of
energy infrastructure for the
environment and communities

Currently, the construction of new and expanded industrial facilities are handled by multiple state agencies with multiple
permit guidelines depending on the nature of the technology and the location of the proposed facility. All such decisions
must be made in accordance with Article IX, §1 of the Louisiana Constitution, which serves as the basis for what is known
as the “Public Trust Doctrine*.” However, varying agency priorities, regulatory nuances, and administrative or judicial
decisions have led to a complex and at-times disjointed process. Additionally, siting decisions are made on a permit-bypermit basis without having the benefit of a comprehensive statewide plan or framework, as addressed by Action 26.3.
Members of the Task Force and the public have raised concerns about the ability of
*Public Trust Doctrine
current permitting regulations to fully integrate the most recent understanding of climate
impacts and environmental justice concerns. Via Executive Order, the Governor
The public trust doctrine is the
should mandate that all project, permitting, and facility siting decisions align with goal of
broadest legal doctrine in
net zero GHG emissions by 2050 and consider opportunities to practicably avoid or
Louisiana from which an
agency's obligation to conserve
minimize GHG emissions. This action would include convening an interagency panel
the state's natural resources
(including DOA, DOTD, DEQ, DNR Office of Conservation, DNR Office of Coastal
and to protect the environment
arises.
Management (OCM), LDAF, CPRA, Department of Wildlife and Fisheries (LDWF)) with the
benefit of robust public input, particularly from those who face disproportionate climate
and environmental impacts, to review and update projects, regulations, and permitting practices to ensure that project,
permitting, and siting decisions are climate neutral and are not exceeding the cumulative risk burden on vulnerable
communities, tribal lands, or the environment. With the ultimate goal to streamline permitting processes, this action
ensures efficient and strategic development of energy infrastructure that benefits all participating stakeholders.
(Associated Submitted Action Proposals: 46)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

111

STRATEGY 27. Ensure that Climate Action Plan strategies are effectively and
transparently implemented
Realizing lasting success in reducing net GHG emissions reductions and ensuring positive overall
benefit to the state requires that the actions and strategies outlined here translate to meaningful
change. This success must be founded on continued transparency as well as regular monitoring and
oversight of plan implementation. Actions under this strategy are designed to maintain that
transparency and oversight, ensuring that the people of Louisiana can have confidence that the
economy, environment, and their well-being will be maintained and improved while GHG emissions
are reduced.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Effectiveness and Durability: Establishing mechanisms for active management and public engagement of Climate
Action Plan implementation ensures that actions in the plan are carried out as intended.

•

Public Confidence: The confidence of the public in the effectiveness and outcomes of the Climate Action Plan – and
support for its continued implementation – relies on transparency in execution and clear accountability of the
state’s progress towards its GHG emission reduction goals.

ACTION 27.1 Establish a statutory and organizational framework for coordinating and implementing
statewide climate resilience
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature / Governor’s Office

Develop and workshop a governing
framework for climate resilience

Ensure long-standing and adaptive
implementation of the Action Plan

Climate change mitigation and adaptation require extensive coordination across multiple stakeholders inside and outside
of government. It also requires focus and authority to oversee the implementation of this plan and assess progress toward
meeting the Governor’s GHG emission reduction goals. In the near-term this action proposes that the Edwards
administration work with the Louisiana Legislature to create a statutory and organizational framework to staff, coordinate,
and implement continued management of climate and resilience initiatives and ensure the successful implementation
of the actions contained in this Climate Action Plan. Through this organizational framework, the Governor, his staff, and
cabinet members and agencies would receive advice on action related to climate mitigation and adaptation to ensure
vision and action for decarbonization are threaded across the Administration. This near-term action prepares the
Administration to advocate for a permanent office, such as a Governor’s Office of Climate Resilience, that governs and
staffs climate change mitigation and adaptation across agencies, levels of government, and external stakeholders.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

112

ACTION 27.2 Ensure that the Climate Initiatives Task Force continues over the short-, medium-, and
long-term to steer and oversee efforts to achieve the statewide goal of net zero GHG emissions by 2050
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature / Task Force /
Governor’s Office

Develop a public governing body for
effective climate resilience

Ensure long-standing and adaptive
implementation of the Action Plan

Alongside a designated office to coordinate and oversee climate and resilience initiatives across the State of Louisiana,
the longevity of the Task Force is necessary to ensure public coordination and oversight of climate and resilience
actions. Upon adoption of the 2022 Climate Action Plan, the Task Force should convene at least quarterly each year
to ensure progress is made towards the implementation of emission reduction strategies and actions; the impacts
of these actions on the people, environment, and economy of Louisiana are understood; transparency and
accountability are maintained; and the critical issue of climate change in Louisiana remains in focus across
changes in executive leadership. Regular meetings of the Task Force are necessary to chart progress on
implementation of the climate mitigation efforts, provide a forum for public engagement and oversight, and identify
opportunities to increase the effectiveness of action implementation. To ensure longevity of the Task Force beyond
administrations, the Task Force should be established in statute with this meeting regularity and with objectives
mirroring those of this action. This statute of the Task Force should also legislatively establish the goal of carbon
neutrality by 2050.
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, expressing concern that codification of the Task Force in
statute jeopardizes opportunities to change based on evolving market conditions and that the executive branch
currently has the authority to meet the objectives of the action. DISSENTER: Gray.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

113

STRATEGY 28. Track progress in reducing net GHG emissions reductions and
adapt the approaches taken as needed
Another vital component to catalyzing the success of the Climate Action Plan is monitoring the
progress of the actions and strategies in driving net GHG emissions reductions. In addition, these
outcomes must be used as part of a data-driven approach to revisit and update the Climate Action
Plan over time through an adaptive management process. Actions that have proven successful can
be continued as part of this process, while actions that have not been as impactful in practice as
anticipated can be refined or updated. Implementation of actions under this strategy will ensure that
there is a framework for making updates to the Climate Action Plan and for collecting the data and
information necessary to make adaptive management decisions.
Highlights of how this strategy can realize benefits for Louisiana:
•

Flexibility and Adaptability: New technologies, processes, approaches, and programs aimed at reducing net GHG
emissions can be incorporated into this Climate Action Plan as they become available. Demonstration of new
technologies and approaches at an operational scale via pilot projects can serve as an important first step.

•

Continued Success: By using data to monitor progress in the near-term, the trajectory of Louisiana towards
meetings its goals can be objectively tracked. Tracking and evaluation of this Climate Action Plan over time can
also identify and strengthen the most effective actions and strategies as part of reaching the state’s long-term
goals. As a living plan, adaptive management of all strategies and actions is key for long-term success in an
uncertain future.

ACTION 28.1 Establish a Louisiana GHG monitoring program
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

DEQ

Create a GHG Monitoring Program

Hold implementers accountable in
incremental GHG reductions

Regular collection of GHG data across the state is vital to providing checkpoints on GHG reduction to adaptively manage
emission reduction approaches across all sectors. This action directs immediate creation of a GHG Monitoring Program
by DEQ to collect GHG data across all emission sectors, which will be used in conjunction with regular updates of the
GHG inventory. The GHG Monitoring Program should utilize real-time, continuous data collection technologies that can
be directly assessed by DEQ where feasible. As mentioned in prior actions, the GHG monitoring program will incorporate
detailed data for specific sectors, including utility climate rankings (Action 1.), carbon intensity product audits and
emission reporting from facilities (Action 3.1), and the methane monitoring stations (Action 10.2). Immediate integration
of and regular updates to these detailed datasets is essential for tracking progress, ensuring accountability, and repairing
leaks across high-intensive emission sectors. In addition, this action would facilitate benchmarking that could be used to
determine whether the strategies and actions included in the Louisiana Climate Action Plan are effective once
implemented.
DISSENTING VIEW: One member objected to this action, asserting that DEQ already has and currently exercises
authority to require monitoring where deemed necessary. DISSENTER: Gray.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

114

ACTION 28.2 Update the state GHG inventory every five years
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Legislature / DEQ

Ensure mandatory, consistent
updates to the GHG inventory

Hold implementers accountable in
incremental GHG reductions

In conjunction with regular collection of GHG data (Action 28.1), updates to the GHG inventory are necessary to
consistently monitor progress and hold the state accountable for progress towards reduction goals. This action tasks the
Louisiana Legislature to statutorily mandate updates to the GHG inventory every five
*U.S. EPA SIT Model
years with consistent funding to support these efforts, with the ability of the Task
EPA’s State Inventory Tool (SIT)
Force to request a GHG inventory sooner than five years if the technology has
offers a top-down approach to
significantly improved. Additionally, this action supports work by the state to continue to
calculate GHG emissions across
11 modules, produced in an
increase the accuracy of this assessment as technologies evolve. This action proposes
interactive spreadsheet model
building upon existing methods, as the EPA SIT*, and investing in emerging
designed to help states develop
GHG inventories. The EPA SIT
technologies, such as remote sensing, satellite imagery, carbon storage of natural
model
has
known
and
sinks, and other tools, to provide more accurate and comprehensive monitoring of
acknowledged limitations.
GHG emissions in Louisiana. This data will allow for more continuous and locationspecific data from the GHG monitoring program (Action 28.1) and criteria pollutants
monitored by the existing DEQ Air Quality Monitoring Program into the GHG inventory.

ACTION 28.3 Update the Louisiana Climate Action Plan every five years
IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

GOALS

Task Force / Legislature /
Governor’s Office

Ensure mandatory, consistent
updates to the Action Plan

Hold implementers accountable in
adaptive management of the Action
Plan

The strategies and actions outlined in the Louisiana Climate Action Plan have been selected based on their expected
effectiveness in reducing net GHG emissions while also having the best anticipated outcomes for the state and its people.
Regular GHG monitoring (Action 28.1) and updated GHG inventories (Action 28.2) will reveal where those actions are
effective, while at the same time new strategies or actions may become available due to advances in technology or
increased understanding of the most effective approaches in net GHG emission reduction. Therefore, the Climate Action
Plan should be updated one-year following each updated GHG inventory (Action 28.2). Through near-term legislation, this
action would allow and require updates to Louisiana’s Climate Action Plan every five years by the Governor’s Office to
ensure that climate action continues to be based on the best available science and that the actions taken demonstrate
benefits to Louisiana’s communities, environment, and economy to the greatest extent possible. Planned updates are
necessary to ensure ineffective actions could be modified or replaced, the greatest investment is in the most effective
approaches, and new technologies could be incorporated when available.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS

115

Next Steps and Adaptive Management of Louisiana’s First
Climate Action Plan
This Climate Action Plan lays out 28 strategies and 84 actions to meet Louisiana’s 2050 goal of carbon neutrality.
Strategies set forth provide high-level approaches, intended to be consistent across timescales, while actions
represent policy-specific steps towards emission reduction. Actions take a comprehensive approach to mitigate
GHG emissions as best determined in 2021, but as technologies, markets, and stakeholder preferences
continue to evolve, actions will need to as well.
Through utilizing the EPS Tool, this Action Plan indicates EPS policies with the greatest impact to drive down
GHGs, particularly industrial-scale electrification, renewable generation, and industrial fuel switching to low- and
no-carbon hydrogen. However, the model lacks granularity where Louisiana’s inventory also lacks granularity,
leaving a range of uncertainties in certain sectors. Notable gaps are in methane monitoring and reporting, natural
carbon sequestration potential by habitat type, source and sink of emissions in agriculture, forestry, and coastal
management practices, carbon pricing design, transportation policy modeling, and other forms of low- and nocarbon hydrogen production. These gaps do not infringe on the efficacy of the Action Plan but offer primary areas
where modeling needs to be refined and actions made more accurate.
Alongside academic research solicited in individual action descriptions, cross-action information gaps require
intentional study to inform deployment at scale. Acknowledging its impact on emission reduction, particularly
prevalent is the pairing and sequencing of renewable and clean electricity generation with industrial
electrification, together with the need to identify facility-level electrification potential. Other information gaps
arise in understanding the current landscape and needed improvements in the regulatory environment,
sequencing the energy transition with bolstering the clean energy job pipeline, and timing of industrial fuelswitching to low- and no-carbon hydrogen.
These gaps in understanding, modeling, and sequencing of GHG-reducing actions serve as starting points to
bridge gaps of and strengthen the Action Plan. As this information is better understood, in conjunction with more
accurate GHG accounting through the GHG monitoring program and GHG inventory updates, the Task Force must
review, revise, and amend the Climate Action Plan every five years.
In addition to reviewing and commenting on statewide GHG accounting, the Task Force was created to balance
interests and maximize fundamental objectives set forth at the beginning of this effort. Diverging opinions within
the Task Force have primarily arisen from how to balance these objectives. Though discussions have begun,
more work must be done to continue sharing values, understanding perspectives, and finding balance in policy
recommendations. Additional research must be done to account for impacts to fundamental objectives in the
implementation of this Action Plan. Relevant to improving quality of life and creating a more equitable society,
mechanisms to meaningfully measure improvements in equity, community engagement, public health, and
quality of life are essential to accountability. Relevant to the economy and workforce, further understanding of
implications on ratepayers and customers must be better accounted for and incorporated into updates of the
Action Plan. Similarly, as the impacts of climate change are increasingly felt across Louisiana, conservation of
natural resources and climate adaptation must be aggressive but responsive.
In summation, this Action Plan represents a bold step forward for Louisiana to meet its 2050 goal of carbon
neutrality but requires continual effort to implement, adaptively manage, and better understand climate
solutions. The Governor’s Office shall maintain a central role in chairing and staffing the Climate Initiatives Task
Force to continue discussions of the Task Force, hold implementers accountable, update the Climate Action Plan,

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

116

and urge ambition to meet the Governor’s emission reduction goals. Alongside regular meetings of a longstanding Task Force and updates to the Climate Action Plan every five years, agencies and other implementers
should formally report out to the Task Force each year with progress towards near-term action and longer-term
goals. This first iteration of Louisiana’s Climate Action Plan is intended to serve as a catalyst for continued bold
action by all implementers – current and future – now through 2050.

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

117

Implementation Matrix
TABLE 2. IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX OF THE LOUISISANA CLIMATE ACTION PLAN, 2022. TABLE SUMMARIZES IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS, NEAR-TERM
ACTIONS, AND GOALS FOR ACTIONS WITHIN EACH PORTFOLIO SECTION, INCLUDING AN INDICATION OF WHETHER FUNDING IS NEEDED.

ACTION
NUMBER

IMPLEMENTATION PARTNERS

NEAR-TERM ACTION

FUNDING
NEEDED ☒

GOALS

CLEAN ENERGY TRANSITION
1.1

PSC / utilities

Establish a Renewable and Clean
Portfolio Standard

☒

100% renewable or clean by 2035, at
least 80% from renewable sources

1.2

PSC / utilities / Governor’s Office

Engage in Entergy Louisiana, LLC and
Cleco Power LLC integrated resource
planning (IRP) process in 2022

☒

Encourage generation of renewable power

1.3

PSC / utilities / industry / LED /
DNR / universities

Prioritize offshore wind strategic
planning for outreach, workforce, and
impact assessments

☒

5 gigawatts of offshore wind generation by
2035

1.4

PSC / utilities

Establish tariff offerings for renewable
and clean power

☐

Encourage purchasing of renewable power

1.5

PSC / utilities / industry

Understand implications of deregulated
power (such as Power Purchase
Agreements)

☒

Encourages
power

1.6

PSC / utilities / MISO / SPP / DNR

Assess infrastructure needs to plan
renewable connectivity

☒

30%
increased
transmission
infrastructure by 2030 and 100% by 2050

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

generation

of

renewable

118

1.7

PSC / utilities / DNR Office of
Energy

Solicit funds for energy storage pilot
projects

☒

100 megawatts of energy storage by 2030

1.8

PSC / utilities / DEQ

Assess gaps and synthesize existing
data on generation

☒

Encourage generation of renewable power

2.1

Legislature

Reinstate incentives for
installation and storage

☒

Encourage purchasing of renewable power

2.2

PSC

Review net metering policies

☒

Account for value of distributed solar
generation

2.3

FEMA / GOHSEP
National Guard

Plan and implement microgrids and
dispatchable battery units

☒

Speed post-disaster
resilience

2.4

PSC

Determine best mechanisms for thirdparty generation (e.g., industry) to sell
energy back to the grid

☒

Encourage generation of renewable power

/

Louisiana

renewable

recovery

and

INDUSTRIAL DECARBONIZATION
3.1

DEQ / EPA / Industry

Accurately account for facility-level
emissions and product carbon intensity

☒

Provide facility-specific accountability in
emission reduction

3.2

DEQ / Industry

Develop a framework for facility-level
GHG reducing plans

☒

Provide facility-specific support in
emission reduction

3.3

DEQ / Legislature / Governor’s
Office

Identify carbon pricing mechanism best
suited for Louisiana

☒

Provide facility-specific accountability in
emission reduction

3.4

DEQ / DNR

Develop a Net Zero Industry Standard

☒

Ensure net zero for industry by 2050

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

119

4.1

DNR

Pursue rulemaking for implementation
of efficiency standard

☐

Reduce energy intensity of industry

4.2

DNR / LSU-IAC

Assess needed support for
implementation of efficiency standard

☒

Support reduced energy intensity of
industry

5.1

LED / DNR / PSC / Governor’s Office
/ Industry

Invest in mechanisms to accelerate
industrial electrification

☒

Abate industry emissions through
electrification to the extent practicable

5.2

DNR / U.S.-DOE / Industry

Invest in research and demonstration
projects to accelerate fuel- and
feedstock- switching

☒

Abate heavy industry emissions through
alternative feedstocks and fuels to the
extent practicable

5.3

DNR / U.S.-DOE / Industry /
Communities

Invest in research for siting and impact
assessments of CCUS buildout

☒

Abate remaining high-intensity emissions
through carbon capture and storage

5.4

Universities

Solicit funding to understand utilization
techniques of captured carbon

☒

Recycle emissions through utilization of
captured carbon

5.5

U.S.-DOE / DEQ / DNR / PSC /
Utilities / Industry / Communities

Strategically plan decarbonization of
industrial clusters

☒

Provide cluster-specific support in
emission reduction

6.1

DOA

Secure low-carbon products through
procurement practices and laws

☒

Reduce GHG footprint of state government
while growing market for clean and green
products

6.2

DEQ / Waste Management Entities /
NGOs / Universities

Invest in pilot projects to reduce
lifecycle emissions of products

☒

Minimize wasted energy through circular
principles

ACTIVELY MANAGE METHANE EMISSIONS

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

120

7.1

DNR / Legislature

Pursue rulemaking to tighten the
definition of “responsible party” and
establish a companion database

☒

Provide clarity and accountability for
responsible parties

7.2

DNR / Legislature

Pursue legislation to raise financial
security and remove blanket securities

☐

Incentivize compliance
requirements

7.3

DNR / Legislature

Pursue rulemaking to tighten the
definition of “future utility”

☐

Provide clarity and accountability for
inactive wells

7.4

DNR

Invest in workforce training programs
for monitoring and plugging wells

☒

Provide Louisiana workers opportunities to
transition

8.1

DNR / DEQ

Pursue rulemaking to align with
methane rules of other states and the
EPA

☒

Reduce amount of methane released

8.2

DEQ

Incorporate emerging technologies into
methane monitoring

☒

Monitor methane releases with more
frequency and accuracy

8.3

DEQ / DNR / U.S.-EPA

Strengthen LDAR best practices to
monitor and fix malfunctioning
practices

☒

Repair methane releases
frequency and accuracy

with

operator

with

more

TRANSPORTATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
9.1

DOA

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Update procurement practices to meet
public fleet transition goals

☒

Transition 50% public fleets to low- and
zero-emission vehicles and fuels by 2035
and 100% by 2050

121

9.2

DOTD / NGOs / MPOs / Local
Governments

Utilize federal funding to intentionally
build out infrastructure

☒

250 electric vehicle charging stations per
100,000 residents by 2050

9.3

DOTD Transportation Research Center

Research efficacy of alternative fuels to
decarbonize heavy transit

☒

Research and deploy at scale solutions to
decarbonize freight

9.4

DOTD / DNR / DEQ

Identify and pursue pilot projects to
decarbonize heavy transit

☒

Research and deploy solutions at scale
to decarbonize freight

10.1

DOTD / MPOs / Local Governments

Utilize multiple mechanisms to
implement vehicle miles traveled (VMT)
reduction strategies

☒

Double use of alternative modes of
transportation by 2035

10.2

BEL Commission

Leverage federal funding for expansion
of broadband access

☒

Reduce vehicle miles traveled through athome resources

10.3

DOA

Adopt a statewide hybrid workplace
policy

☐

Reduce vehicle miles traveled through athome resources

10.4

DOA

Pursue
rulemaking
telematics for fleets

require

☒

Maximize efficiency of GHG-producing
vehicles

10.5

DOTD / DOA / LED

Invest in research of smart transit
techniques and best practices

☒

Maximize efficiency of energy-intensive
freight transit

11.1

DOTD
/
Regional
MPOs
Municipalities / Legislature

/

Leverage available funding for urban
transit deserts and local jurisdictions

☒

Reduce VMT through connectivity within
urban areas

11.2

DOTD / Local Governments / Rural
Transit Providers

Develop on-demand ridership systems
in rural areas

☒

Reduce VMT through connectivity within
rural areas

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

to

122

Collaborate and plan intentional
connectivity between cities

☒

Reduce VMT through connectivity across
regions of Louisiana

DOA

Create an Office of State Planning in
DOA

☒

Support locals in comprehensive land use,
climate mitigation, and adaptation
planning

12.2

DOA Office of State Planning / DOTD

Convene stakeholders to plan and
design compact development across
levels of government

☒

Maximize VMT reduction and utilization of
regional transit through land use planning

12.3

DOA Office of State Planning /
Regional MPOs / Local Government

Develop land use and transportation
modeling tools for utilization in
decision making

☒

Maximize VMT reduction and utilization of
regional transit through land use planning

12.4

DOTD

Incorporate a climate impact analysis
into DOTD project planning and design

☒

Mitigation
unintentional
emissions
through large-scale transportation

12.5

DOA Office of State Planning / DNR

Create model solar ordinance policy
materials

☒

Encourage purchasing of renewable power

13.1

PSC / LHC / DNR / DOA-OCD

Inventory and streamline application to
existing efficiency programs

☒

5% retrofit of residential and commercial
buildings each year

13.2

Legislature / Local Governments

Pursue legislation for redesign of
Property-Assessed Clean Energy (PACE)
financing

☒

Encourage effectiveness of
building efficiency programs

existing

13.3

Legislature

Pursue legislation for efficient and
electric appliance rebates

☒

Encourage
components

building

11.3

DOTD / Local MPOs /
Governments / Municipalities

12.1

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Rural

efficiency

of

123

13.4

Legislature / LSUCCC / PSC

Pursue legislation for energy efficiency
code updates and standards

☐

Require minimum efficiency of buildings

13.5

DOA

Pursue funding for implementation of
energy benchmarking requirements

☒

Monitor carbon impact of buildings and
building materials

13.6

LSUCCC

Pursue building code updates through
the 2021-2022 revision process

☐

Require minimum energy performance
standards of buildings

NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS AND WETLANDS
14.1

LDAF / Land Trusts / Local
Governments/ Private Landowners

Assess a baseline of areas most in need
of conservation

☒

30% conservation of interior natural lands
by 2030

14.2

LDAF / Parish
Governments

Convene stakeholders in major urban
areas to expand urban green space

☒

30% conservation of interior natural lands
by 2030

15.1

CPRA

Study carbon storage potential of
wetland projects

☒

Maximize carbon sequestration of coastal
wetland restoration

15.2

CPRA

Invest in assessments of net carbon flux
of coastal wetlands

☐

Maximize carbon sequestration of coastal
wetland restoration

15.3

Universities / CPRA / blue carbon
experts and verifiers / coastal
ecologists

Collaborate with stakeholders
design a carbon credit and market

to

☒

Maximize
investment
in
carbon
sequestration of wetland restoration

16.1

USDA / LDAF

Leverage
USDA
investment
for
innovative practices that reduce GHGs

☒

Encourage conservation practices that
sequester carbon

and

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Municipal

124

16.2

USDA-NRCS / SWCDs / LDAF

Convene farmers, ranchers, and
foresters to identify barriers to
regenerative practices

☒

Increase access to regenerative agriculture
and forestry practices

16.3

USDA-NRCS / SWCDs / Landowners

Advocate for further
conservation farming

on-farming

☒

Increase access to regenerative agriculture
and forestry practices

16.4

Universities / LDAF / DEQ

Study ability of best management
practices (BMPs) to reduce and
sequester GHG emissions

☒

Encourage conservation practices that
sequester carbon

16.5

LDAF / SWCDs

Develop an urban agriculture and
conservation program

☒

Increase urban access to regenerative
agriculture and forestry practices

16.6

LDEQ / LDAF

Collaborate on strategic design and
locations of compost facilities

☒

Increase access to regenerative agriculture
practices

16.7

LFA / LDAF / DOA / LED

Convene
major
foresters
for
educational sessions on sustainable
forest practices

☒

Increase access to regenerative forestry
practices

AN INCLUSIVE, LOW-CARBON ECONOMY
17.1

LED / LWC / Louisiana Technical and
Community College System

Convene stakeholders to develop vision
and ambition for an economic
transition plan

☒

Support Louisiana agencies, industries,
and workers in energy transition

18.1

Department of Education

Develop climate curricula projects for
K-12 education

☒

Center climate
classrooms

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

education

in

K-12

125

18.2

LWC / Universities / Community
Colleges

Develop relevant education, training,
and re-training courses and curricula

☒

Guarantee job training for workers in
energy transition

18.3

The Water Institute of the Gulf

Collaborate with universities to identify
existing climate-related work and
research gaps

☒

Support Louisiana universities in energy
transition

19.1

LED / LWC / Louisiana Community
and Technical College System

Invest in Louisiana-based low-carbon
industries

☒

Support Louisiana industries in energy
transition

19.2

LED

Prioritize investment in disadvantaged
business enterprises and communities

☒

Support underserved
energy transition

19.3

LWC

Assist transitioning workers through
Rapid Response teams

☒

Support displaced workers in energy
transition

19.4

LWC / Non-Profits / Businesses /
Unions

Convene stakeholder groups
coordinated job placement

☒

Guarantee job placement
transition workforce

for

communities

in

in

energy

ACCOUNTABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY TO ENSURE LASTING SUCCESS
26.1

Legislature / DOA

Invest increased resources in agencies
implementing the Action Plan

☒

Maximize effective implementation of the
Action Plan

26.2

Universities / DNR

Prioritize federal and state research
funding for CCUS impact analysis

☒

Maximize effective implementation of the
Action Plan

26.3

Governor’s Office / State Agencies

Establish an interagency working group
to develop pre-permitting environmental
siting analysis

☒

Ensure safe and resilient siting of energy
infrastructure for the environment and
communities

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

126

26.4

Governor’s Office / State Agencies

Establish an interagency working group
to review existing siting and permitting
procedures

☒

Ensure safe and resilient siting of energy
infrastructure for the environment and
communities

27.1

Legislature / Governor’s Office

Develop and workshop a governing
framework for climate resilience

☒

Ensure long-standing and adaptive
implementation of the Action Plan

27.2

Legislature / Task Force /
Governor’s Office

Develop a public governing body for
effective climate resilience

☒

Ensure long-standing and adaptive
implementation of the Action Plan

28.1

DEQ

Create a GHG Monitoring Program

☒

Hold implementers accountable
incremental GHG reductions

in

28.2

Legislature / DEQ

Ensure mandatory, consistent updates
to the GHG inventory

☒

Hold implementers accountable
incremental GHG reductions

in

28.3

Task Force / Legislature /
Governor’s Office

Ensure mandatory, consistent updates
to the Action Plan

☒

Hold implementers accountable in adaptive
management of the Action Plan

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

127

Acronyms
Acronym

Definition

BMP

Best Management Practice

CCUS

Carbon capture, utilization, and storage

CCS

Carbon capture and storage

CHP

Combined Heat and Power

CO2

Carbon dioxide

CPRA

Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority

CRMS

Coastwide Reference Monitoring System

DEQ

Department of Environmental Quality

DOA

Division of Administration

DOE

Department of Energy

DOTD

Department of Transportation and Development

DWF

Department of Wildlife and Fisheries

NRCS

Natural Resource Conservation Service

DNR

Louisiana Department of Natural Resources

EPA

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

ERGS

Emission Reduction Generation and Supply

GHG

Greenhouse Gas

HELP

Home Energy Loan Program

HERO

Home Energy Rebate Option

HOV

High-occupancy vehicle

IAC

Industrial Assessment Center

IRP

Integrated resource plan

LDAF

Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry

LDAR

Leak Detection and Repair

LED

Louisiana Economic Development

LFA

Louisiana Forestry Association

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

128

Acronym

Definition

LHC

Louisiana Housing Corporation

LSU

Louisiana State University

LSUCCC

Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council

LWC

Louisiana Workforce Commission

MISO

Midcontinent Independent System Operator

MPO

Metropolitan Planning Organization

NGO

Non-governmental organizations

OCM

Office of Coastal Management

OOC

Office of Conservation

OSR

Oilfield Site Restoration

PACE

Property-assessed clean energy

PPA

Power Purchase Agreement

PSC

Louisiana Public Service Commission

RPP

Research Practitioner Partnership

SEM

Strategic Energy Management

SIT

State Inventory Tool

SPP

Southwest Power Pool

SWAMP

System Wide Assessment and Monitoring Program

SWCD

Soil and Water Conservation Districts

TDM

Travel Demand Management

USDA

U.S. Department of Agriculture

VMT

Vehicle miles travelled

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

129

Glossary
Term

Definition

Action

A specific policy, program, or project that can be directly implemented to achieve a
specific goal or complete a process
Long-term adjustments that can be made to aid in withstanding current and future
changes in environmental conditions
State-led effort to increase the resilience of state agencies to the impacts of the
coastal crisis. Working through resilience coordinators at each agency, the
adaptive governance initiative seeks to integrate projections from the coastal
master plan into decision making and develop and institutionalize resilience
actions within and across state government
Also known as non-conventional and advanced fuels, these are any materials or
substances that can be used as fuels other than gasoline and fossil fuels for power
generation, such as natural gas, methanol, biofuel, or electricity
Carbon stored in the sediment and plants of coastal and marine ecosystems, such
as mangroves, tidal marshes, and seagrass beds
Also called “emissions trading, this is a system for controlling carbon emissions
and other forms of atmospheric pollution by which an upper limit is set on the
amount of carbon a given business or other organization may produce but which
allows further capacity to be bought from other organizations that have not used
their full allowance, thus providing economic incentives and creating a market
The process of pulling CO2 from the atmosphere naturally or through engineered
methods from a point source emitter
The long-term capture and storage of carbon in oceans, soils, vegetation, and
geologic formations, which can occur either naturally or through anthropogenic
(human) mechanisms
Any reservoir, natural or otherwise, that accumulates and stores some carboncontaining chemical compound for an indefinite period and thereby lowers the
concentration of CO₂ from the atmosphere by storing more carbon than it emits
The containment of captured carbon when it is injected into deep, underground
geological formations, where it is stored long-term, rather than being released into
the atmosphere. Storage sites used for CO₂ include former oil and gas reservoirs,
deep saline formations, and coal beds
A measure used in GHG inventories to compare the emissions from various GHGs,
by converting amounts of other gases to the equivalent amount of CO2 with the
same global warming potential
The number of grams of CO2 that it takes to make one unit of electricity a kilowatt
per hour (kW/hour); the amount of carbon by weight emitted per unit of energy
consumed/unit of economic activity
A model of production and consumption which involves sharing, leasing, reusing,
repairing, refurbishing and recycling existing materials and products as long as
possible; in this way, the life cycle of products is extended to reduce waste to a
minimum which can help tackle major global challenges like climate change,
biodiversity loss, waste, and pollution

Adaptation
Adaptive
Governance
Initiative
Alternative Fuel
Blue Carbon
Cap and Trade
Program

Carbon Capture
Carbon
Sequestration
Carbon Sink

Carbon Storage

Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
Equivalent (CO2E)
Carbon Intensity
Circular Economy

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

130

Term

Definition

Clean Energy

Energy generated from non-renewable sources with little to zero GHGs, includes
but is not limited to nuclear, biowaste, and natural gas with carbon capture

Clean Portfolio
Standard

Regulations that are intended to reduce GHG emissions through requirements for
cleaner energy techniques, where options are expanded beyond renewable energy
sources to incorporate efficiency measures and other carbon reduction measures;
this includes things like energy efficiency, fuel cells, fuel efficiency improvements,
grid improvements, demand-side and direct-load measures, nuclear power, and
fossil fuel technologies that include CO2 capture and storage equipment
A people-centered approach to addressing the global climate crisis through action
that seeks to achieve long-term equality of outcomes by acknowledging
institutionalized harms to historically marginalized people and communities and by
holding accountable those who benefit from the root causes of climate change that
disproportionately impact the most vulnerable
Group that represents the state’s position in policy relative to the protection,
conservation, enhancement, and restoration of the coastal area of the state. They
do so by overseeing the Coastal Protection and Restoration Trust Fund, developing
a master plan for integrated coastal protection, and enforcing compliance with
the Coastal Master Plan
The state’s 50-year blueprint for large-scale restoration and protection of
Louisiana’s critical coastal areas. The plan, authored by the Louisiana Coastal
Protection and Restoration Authority (CPRA), is updated every six years as required
by law to account for evolving science and changing environmental conditions. It
combines projects that restore, build or maintain coastal wetlands with projects
that provide enhanced risk reduction for coastal communities from storms and
flooding
Any solar project or purchasing program, within a geographic area, in which the
benefits of a solar project flow to multiple customers such as individuals,
businesses, nonprofits, and other groups; in most cases, customers are benefitting
from energy generated by solar panels at an off-site array. The solar power
installation accepts capital from and provides output credit and tax benefits to
individual and other investors; in some systems, a person or group can buy
individual solar panels which are installed in the solar farm after purchase
A transportation policy and design approach that requires streets to be planned,
designed, operated and maintained to enable safe, convenient and comfortable
travel and access for users of all ages and abilities regardless of their mode of
transportation, whether they are pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists or public
transportation users
Fairness or justice in the way people are treated, recognizing that we do not all
start from the same place and must acknowledge and make adjustments to
imbalances. This can be achieved by expanding access to opportunity, quality of
life and prosperity
The modelled trajectories of global anthropogenic emissions over the 21st century
based on predictions of how concentrations of GHG in the atmosphere will change
in the future as a result of human activities

Climate Equity

Coastal Protection
and Restoration
Authority (CPRA)
Board
Coastal Master Plan

Community Solar

Complete Streets

Equity

Emissions Pathway

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

131

Term

Definition

Energy Efficiency
Resource Standard

A quantitative, long-term energy savings target for utilities; under direction from
this policy, utilities must procure a percentage of their future electricity and natural
gas needs using energy efficiency measures, typically equal to a specific
percentage of their load or projected load growth. Energy savings are typically
achieved through customer, end-use efficiency programs run by utilities or thirdparty program operators, sometimes with the flexibility to achieve the target
through a market-based trading system
In Structured Decision Making (SDM), these are essential goals or solutions of this
work that have been informed by the Climate Initiatives Task Force, Advisory
Groups, Sector Committees, and public that guide development and evaluation of
strategies and actions
Hydrogen is a fuel source that has multiple applications in transportation,
electricity generation, industrial uses, and many more. Green hydrogen is produced
using renewable energy through electrolysis. This is a process that splits water into
its basic elements – hydrogen and oxygen – using an electric current. The electricity
used in the process comes from renewable resources
Programs in regulated electricity markets offered by utilities that allow large
commercial and industrial customers to buy bundled renewable electricity from a
specific project through a special utility tariff rate; this allows customers to source
up to 100 percent of their electricity from renewable sources located on their local
grid. This is done through a price structure, or an electricity rate, that is approved
by the state's Public Utility Commission
A gas that contributes to the entrapment of heat in the atmosphere by absorbing
infrared radiation. The primary GHGs in Earth's atmosphere are water vapor,
CO2, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone. Many GHGs are naturally occurring,
though concentrations can be affected based on human input
A list of emission sources, sinks, and the associated emissions over a certain
period of time, quantified using standardized methods

Fundamental
Objectives
Green Hydrogen

Green Tariffs

Greenhouse Gas
(GHG)
Greenhouse Gas
Inventory
High-Occupancy
Vehicle (HOV) Lanes

Home Energy Loan
Program (HELP)

One or more lanes of a roadway that have restrictions on use to encourage
ridesharing and can reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) by being open to motor
vehicles carrying two or more people and sometimes to motorcycles or vehicles
that use alternative fuels (hybrid or electric vehicles). The goal of HOV lanes is to
provide an incentive to use ridesharing and public transportation, remove
congestion from normal lanes of travel, and improve overall traffic operations
A loan option administered by the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) that allows homeowners to get a five-year loan to improve the energy
efficiency of their existing home, with the loan functioning as a standard unsecured
underwritten residential loan. DNR subsidizes half of the financing for energy
efficiency improvements at a low interest rate to participating lenders, up to a
maximum DNR subsidy of $6,000. Each participating lender sets the maximum
loan amount offered to homeowners, as well as the interest rate that is charged to
the homeowner. A homeowner can qualify for an energy improvement loan in two
ways – either through an energy audit in which an Energy Home Rater makes
recommendations, or by choosing pre-approved home improvements as
designated by the program

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

132

Term

Definition

Home Energy Rebate
Option (HERO)

An Existing Homes Program offered by the Louisiana Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for residents to receive cash rebates for energy efficient
improvements to existing homes that achieve a minimum of 30% energy reduction.
The incentive amount is based on two factors – either the Cost of Energy Savings
determined by comparing the pre-improved home to the post-improved home over
the useful life of the added improvements or the cost of the energy efficiency
improvements. The cash rebate is 20% of the lesser of the two amounts up to a
maximum rebate of $2,000
In-depth evaluations of a facility funded by the United States Department of Energy
to spread ideas relating to industrial energy conservation and conducted by
engineering faculty with upper class and graduate students from a participating
university. Teams located at 35 universities around the country conduct the energy
assessments to identify opportunities to improve productivity and competitiveness,
reduce waste, and save energy
Comprised of an assessment of the future electric needs and a plan to meet those
future needs. It is “integrated” in that it looks at both demand side (conservation,
energy efficiency, etc.) resources as well as the more traditional supply side
(generation/power plants, transmission lines, etc.) resources in making its
recommendations on how best to meet future electric energy needs in the state
An intergovernmental body of the United Nations that is dedicated to providing the
world with objective, scientific information relevant to understanding the scientific
basis of the risk of human-induced climate change, its natural, political, and
economic impacts and risks, and possible response options
State-led program through which floodplain management responsibilities are
coordinated across federal, state, and local agencies, with the goal being to
leverage the state’s past and present flood-risk reduction and resilience efforts
through a variety of projects
Hydrogen produced with a carbon intensity equal to or less than 2 kilograms of
CO2e produced at the site of production per kilogram of hydrogen produced, and it
includes hydrogen produced from any fuel source (see Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act (2021))
A federally mandated and federally funded transportation policy-making
organization in the United States that is made up of representatives from local
government and governmental transportation authorities, created and designated
to carry out the metropolitan transportation planning process and required to
represent localities in all urbanized areas (UZAs) with populations over 50,000, as
determined by the U.S. Census
A small network of electricity users connected through a group of interconnected
loads and distributed energy resources within clearly defined electrical boundaries
that acts as a single controllable entity, with respect to the grid, via a local source
of supply that is usually attached to a centralized national grid but is able to
function independently

Industrial
Assessment Centers
(IACs)

Integrated Resource
Plans (IRPs)

Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC)
Louisiana Watershed
Initiative
Low- and No-Carbon
Hydrogen
Metropolitan
Planning
Organizations
(MPOs)
Microgrids

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

133

Term

Definition

Midcontinent
Independent System
Operator (MISO)

An Independent System Operator (ISO) and Regional Transmission Organizer (RTO)
providing open-access transmission service and monitoring of the high-voltage
transmission system in the Midwest United States and Canada, including a
southern United States region which includes much of Arkansas, Mississippi, and
Louisiana
Generally, the reduction of something harmful or the reduction of the severity,
seriousness, or painfulness of its harmful effects. In the climate context, mitigation
refers to efforts to avoid and reduce the emission of GHG
A United States nonprofit, non-governmental organization charged with providing
independent, objective advice to the nation on matters related to science and
technology. The organization is committed to furthering science in America, and its
members are active contributors to the international scientific community
Summary reports detailing the impacts of climate change on the U.S. now and in
the future. They are updated and released approximately every 5 years, starting in
2000, through the Global Change Research Act of 1990. The reports are
extensively reviewed by the public and experts, including federal agencies and a
panel of the National Academy of Sciences
A system in which solar panels or other renewable energy generators are
connected to a public-utility power grid and surplus power is transferred onto the
grid, allowing customers to offset the cost of power drawn from the utility. Through
a billing mechanism, consumers who generate some or all of their own electricity
are allowed to use that electricity anytime, instead of when it is generated; this is
particularly important with renewable energy sources like wind and solar, which are
non-dispatchable
Team within the Governor’s Office that develops and implements policies, plans,
and programs relative to the protection and restoration of Louisiana's unique
coastal resources and the flood protection of communities in the state, as well as
climate and coastal resiliency
A period in which electrical power is expected to be provided for a sustained period
at a significantly higher than average supply level, up to a maximum energy
consumption on the grid by the consumer, based on demand
Consists of staff from the Office of the Governor—Coastal Activities and the Water
Institute of the Gulf tasked with coordinating the planning process for the
development of the Climate Action Plan and its timely completion
A comprehensive set of strategies and actions towards achieving the GHG
reduction targets and other fundamental objectives
A contract between two parties, one which generates electricity (producer) and one
which is looking to purchase electricity (consumer), and defines the conditions of
the agreement, such as the amount of electricity to be supplied, negotiated prices,
accounting, and penalties for non-compliance
A type of loan offered by the U.S. Department of Energy for financing energy
efficiency upgrades, disaster resiliency improvements, water conservation
measures, or renewable energy installations and improvements of residential,
commercial, and industrial property owners

Mitigation
National Academy of
Sciences
National Climate
Assessment

Net Metering

Office of the
Governor – Coastal
Activities (GOCA)
Peak Electricity
Loads
Planning Team
Portfolio
Power Purchase
Agreements (PPAs)
Property-Assess
Clean Energy (PACE)
Financing

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

134

Term

Definition

Relative Sea Level
Rise

A combination of the absolute (global) sea level rise, which is the change in the
height of the ocean surface above the center of the earth, plus changes (up or
down) in land elevation for the relevant coastal area. Sea level rise at specific
locations may be more or less than the global average due to many local factors
such as subsidence, ocean currents, variations in land height, and whether the
land is still rebounding from the compressive weight of Ice Age glaciers
Energy generated from naturally replenishing energy sources with zero GHGs,
including but not limited to solar, wind, hydropower, and geothermal

Renewable Energy
Renewable Portfolio
Standard
Resilient Louisiana
Commission

Social Determinants
of Health

Social Vulnerability
Southwest Power
Pool (SPP)

Strategic Energy
Management (SEM)
Strategy

A regulation that requires the increased production of energy from renewable
energy sources, such as wind, solar, hydropower, and geothermal, with a
requirement that each specified type of utility ensure that at least a
specified amount of renewable energy be sold each year
State entity charged with examining Louisiana’s economy amid the COVID-19
pandemic and making recommendations for more resilient business-related
activities and commerce that includes a task force structure dedicated to
strengthening specific sectors of Louisiana’s economy. The RLC was specifically
created to guide the state through the Covid-19 crisis and expand the economy
so that it can cope more easily with any future crises
Social determinants of health are the conditions in the environments where
people are born, live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that affect a wide range
of health, functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes and risks. These often
contribute to wide health disparities and inequities. Examples may include safe
housing, transportation, and neighborhoods; racism, discrimination, and violence;
education, job opportunities, and income; access to nutritious foods and physical
activity opportunities; polluted air and water; and language and literacy skills
(Healthy People 2030)
The potential negative effects on communities caused by external stresses on
human health. Such stresses include natural or human-caused disasters, or
disease outbreaks (CDC ATSDR)
A regional transmission organization (RTO) and nonprofit corporation mandated
by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to ensure reliable supplies of
power, adequate transmission infrastructure and competitive wholesale
electricity prices on behalf of its members by managing the electric grid and
wholesale power market for the central United States
A system of organizational practices, policies, and processes that creates
persistent energy savings by integrating energy management into business
practices while focusing on changes in daily operations that engage staff at all
levels of an organization in energy efficiency activities
A high-level path (plan of action or policy) designed to achieve a major or overall
aim/ one or more long-term or overall goals under conditions of uncertainty (e.g.,
GHG emissions reduction)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

135

Term

Definition

Structured Decision
Making (SDM)

An explicit and transparent approach that utilizes a broad set of methods for
analyzing decisions and identifying solutions that achieve desired outcomes. This
approach supports decisions based on clearly articulated fundamental objectives,
integrates science and policy, and remains flexible to legal mandates and public
preferences (or values) in decision making
The Water Institute of the Gulf is an independent, non-profit applied research
organization that works across disciplines to advance science and develop
integrated methods used to solve complex environmental and societal
challenges. The Water Institute's applied research is rooted in the lessons born
from the challenges facing Louisiana and the Gulf Coast. The Water Institute
connects researchers across disciplines to support governmental, private
sector, and nongovernmental organization (NGO) partners in planning for an
uncertain future

Water Institute of
the Gulf

Vector-Borne
Disease

Human illnesses caused by parasites, viruses and bacteria that are transmitted
by vectors, which are living organisms that can transmit infectious pathogens
between humans, or from animals to humans

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

136

Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge and appreciate dedicated contributors to the Louisiana Climate Action Plan for their
leadership, expertise, collaborative spirit, and ongoing commitment to support this work. Thank you to
members of the Task Force; Agriculture, Forestry, Conservation, and Waste Sector Committee; Land Use,
Buildings, and Housing Sector Committee; Manufacturing and Industry Sector Committee; Mining, Oil, and Gas
Sector Committee; Power Production, Distribution, and Use Sector Committee; Transportation Sector
Committee; Equity Advisory Group; Finance Advisory Group; Legal Advisory Group; and Science Advisory Group.
We express great thanks to residents, organizations, institutions, companies, universities, and state
agencies who shared their time, ideas, and continued engagement throughout the creation of the Climate
Action Plan. We extend further gratitude to guest speakers who shared expertise with the Climate Initiatives
Task Force on industrial decarbonization and on carbon capture, storage, and utilization in October
2021, furthering members’ understanding and refinement of related actions. We are also appreciative of the
technical support of the LSU Center for Energy Studies for their development of the 2021 Greenhouse Gas
Inventory and grateful for Energy Innovation’s development of the Louisiana Energy Policy Simulator Tool.
With the technical and planning support of The Water Institute of the Gulf (the Water Institute), the Office
of the Governor, Coastal Activities (GOCA) staffed, developed, and led the visioning and planning process for
the Climate Action Plan. Core Planning Team Members include Harry Vorhoff, Lindsay Cooper, and Charles
Sutcliffe from GOCA and Alyssa Dausman, Colleen McHugh, Soupy Dalyander, Allison DeJong, and Erin
Kiskaddon from the Water Institute. We also acknowledge and appreciate additional staff of GOCA and the
Water Institute who supported this effort. The integral role of the Water Institute as part of the Planning
Team was made possible through the financial support of the U.S. Climate Alliance and the RESTORE
Council.

TASK FORCE MEMBER L IST
•

Chip Kline, Executive Assistant to the Governor for Coastal Activities, Task Force Chair
o Designee: Harry Vorhoff, Deputy Director, Governor’s Office of Coastal Activities

•

Gregory M. Bowser, President and CEO, Louisiana Chemical Association

•

Jonathan Bourg, Director of Resource Planning and Market Operations at Entergy, as a
representative of an electric utility

•

Dr. Chuck Brown, Secretary, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
o Designee of Secretary: Bliss M. Higgins, Assistant Secretary, Office of
Environmental Services

•

Dr. Virginia Burkett, Chief Scientist for Climate and Land Use Change at the United States
Geological Survey, as a nonvoting representative of a federal scientific agency

•

Selby Bush, BHP Petroleum, designee for the Louisiana Speaker of the House Clay
Schexnayder

•

Dr. Terrence Chambers, Director of the Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Energy Center at
the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, as a member of Louisiana’s academic community

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

137

•

Flozell Daniels, Jr., President and CEO of the Foundation for Louisiana, as a member with
experience in community development and engagement

•

Jay Dardenne, Commissioner of Administration, Division of Administration
o Designee: Mark Moses, Assistant Commissioner, Facility Planning & Control

•

Karen Gautreaux, Director of Government Relations for Louisiana at the Nature
Conservancy, as a member of the environmental nonprofit community

•

Tyler Gray, President and General Counsel, Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association

•

Bren Haase, Executive Director, Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority

•

Timothy Hardy, Breazeale, Sachse & Wilson, L.L.P., designee for Louisiana Senate
President Page Cortez

•

Thomas Harris, Secretary, Louisiana Department of Natural Resources
o Designee: Jason Lanclos, Director, State Energy Office

•

Camille Manning-Broome, President and CEO of the Center for Planning Excellence, as a
member at-large

•

Chief Shirell Parfait-Dardar, Tribal Chief of the Grand Caillou/Dulac Band of the BiloxiChitimacha-Choctaw, as a member of an indigenous tribe, nation, or community

•

Colette Pichon Battle, Executive Director of the Gulf Coast Center for Law and Policy, as a
member of the environmental and climate justice community

•

Don Pierson, Secretary, Louisiana Economic Development
o Designee: Brad Lambert, Deputy Secretary, Louisiana Economic Development

•

Bill Robertson, designee of Public Service Commissioner Foster Campbell

•

Jeff Schwartz, Director of Economic Development for the City of New Orleans, as a
representative of local government perspective

•

Mike Strain, Commissioner, Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry
o Designee: Joey Breaux, Assistant Commissioner, Office of Soil and Water
Conservation

•

Dr. Shawn Wilson, Secretary, Department of Transportation and Development
o Designee: Dr. Eric Kalivoda, Deputy Secretary, Department of Transportation and
Development

•

Robert Verchick, Gauthier-St. Martin Eminent Scholar and Chair in Environmental Law at
Loyola University New Orleans, as a member with special qualifications and experience in
climate change policy

SECTOR COMMITTEES MEMBER LIST
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, CONSERVATION, AND WASTE SECTOR COMMITTEE
•

Joey Breaux, Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry (Co-chair)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

138

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Karen Gautreaux, The Nature Conservancy (Co-chair)
Naveen Adusumilli, LSU AgCenter
Kyla Cheynet, Drax
David Daigle, Farmer, Cattleman, and Forester
Ernest Girouard, State Soil and Waste Conservation District Commission
Gregory Grandy, Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority
Ron Harrell, Louisiana Farm Bureau Federation
Fran Harvey, Global Geospatial Institute
Justin Kozak, Center for Planning Excellence
Michael Lindsey, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (Non-voting member)
John Pitre, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (Non-voting member)
Yolunda Righteous, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
Robby Toombs, Resource Management Service LLC
Buck Vandersteen, Louisiana Forestry Association

LAND USE, BUILDINGS, AND HOUSING SECTOR COMMITTEE
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Gina Campo, Office of Community Development (Co-chair)
Camille Manning-Broome, Center for Planning Excellence (Co-chair)
Dr. Fallon Aidoo, University of New Orleans
Dr. Kevin Conrad, Ochsner
Mark Goodson, CSRS
Archie Hall, Siemens Smart Infrastructure
Jason Hewitt, Sustainability Partners
Arthur Johnson, Lower 9th Ward Center for Sustainable Engagement and Development
Kim Marousek, Capital Region Planning Commission
Andreanecia Morris, Greater New Orleans Housing Alliance
Dr. Zhu Ning, Southern University
Camille Pollan, U.S. Green Buildings Council
Louisette Scott, City of Mandeville
Z Smith, Eskew, Dumez, Ripple
Chris Tyson, Build Baton Rouge

MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY SECTOR COMMITTEE
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Jason Meyers, Department of Environmental Quality (Co-chair)
Timothy Hardy, Breazeale, Sachse, & Wilson, LLP (Co-chair)
Scott Anderson, Environmental Defense Fund
Rhoman Hardy, Shell
Hunter Johnson, Lake Charles Methanol
Morris Johnson, CF Industries
Nathan McBride, Louisiana Mid-Continental Oil and Gas Association
Margo Moss, L&M Environmental
Marylee Orr, Louisiana Environmental Action Network
Zen Saunders, Dow Chemical

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

139

•
•
•

Daniel Shantz, Tulane Engineering
Gray Stream, Gulf Coast Sequestration
Tokesha Collins-Wright, Louisiana Chemical Association

MINING, OIL, AND GAS SECTOR COMMITTEE
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Jason Lanclos, Louisiana Department of Natural Resources (Co-chair)
Brent Campbell, Louisiana Department of Resources Office of Conservation (Co-chair)
Tom Broom, Danos
Selby Bush, BHP
Donelson Caffrey, Landowners Association
Al Collins, Occidental Petroleum
William Daniel, Gulf Coast Testing
Mark Gebbia, Williams
Dr. Richard Hughes, Louisiana State University
Andy Jacoby, Attorney
Bryan Johnston, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
Lori LeBlanc, Louisiana Mid-Continental Oil and Gas Association
Glen Lyons, ExxonMobil
Stacy Methvin, Pioneer
Adam Peltz, Environmental Defense Fund
Wynn Radford, British Petroleum
John Sparling, Aethon Energy
Kristi Trail, Pontchartrain Conservancy

POWER PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION, AND USE SECTOR COMMITTEE
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Jonathan Bourg, Entergy (co-chair)
Bill Robertson, Public Service Commission (co-chair)
Jeff Arnold, Association of Louisiana Electric Cooperatives
Logan Atkinson-Burke, Alliance for Affordable Energy
Brian Bond, SWEPCO
Ethan Case, Heelstone Energy
Dr. Terrence Chambers, University of Louisiana Lafayette
David Guerry, Midcontinent Independent System Operator
Katherine King, Kean Miller
Robbie Laborde, CLECO
Simon Mahan, Southern Renewable Energy Association
Kim Talus, Tulane Energy Law
Rob Verchick, Loyola University
Matt White, Drax

TRANSPORTATION SECTOR COMMITTEE
•

Flozell Daniels, Jr., Foundation for Louisiana (Cochair)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

140

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Dr. Eric Kalivoda, Department of Transportation and Development (Co-chair)
Joe Annotti, Gladstein, Neandross & Associates
Chett Chiasson, Port Fourchon
Scott Gammel, Alexandria International Airport
Wyly Gifloil, Lake Providence Port Commission
Dr. Vijaya Gopu, Louisiana Transportation Research Center
Vivian Johnson, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
Jessica Kemp, Center for Planning Excellence
Alex Posorske, Ride New Orleans
Kent Rogers, Northwest Louisiana Council of Governments
Dr. Bethany Stich, UNO Transportation Institute
Ann Vail, LA Clean Fuels
Dinero Washington, SPORTRAN Transit

ADVISORY GROUP MEMBER LIST
EQUITY ADVISORY GROUP
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Colette Pichon Battle, Gulf Coast Center for Law & Policy (Chair)
Charles Allen, National Audubon Society
Jasmine Brown, Greater New Orleans, Inc.
Steve Cochran, Environmental Defense Fund
Dr. Kenny Cole, Oschner
Dr. Craig Colten, Louisiana State University
Chief Shirell Parfait-Dardar, Grand Caillou/Dulac Band of the Biloxi-Chitimacha-Choctaw
Ashleigh Gardere, Policy Link
Jessica Kemp, Center for Planning Excellence
Dr. David Robinson Morris, Xavier University
Liz Williams Russell, Foundation for Louisiana
Larry Sorapuru Jr., St. John the Baptist

FINANCE ADVISORY GROUP
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Brad Lambert, Louisiana Economic Development (Chair)
Dr. Stephen Barnes, University of Louisiana Lafayette
Camille Conaway, Louisiana Community and Technical College System
Pierre Conner, Tulane Energy Center
Stephanie Ferry, Raymond James Financial
Alejandra Guzman, New Orleans Business Alliance
Michael Jackson, Bernhard Capital
Vic Lafont, South Louisiana Economic Council
Brandon Nelson, Whitney Bank
Dr. Jim Richardson, Louisiana State University
Jeff Schwartz, City of New Orleans

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

141

LEGAL ADVISORY GROUP
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Rob Verchick, Loyola Law School (Chair)
Nick Bryner, Louisiana State University
Courtney Burdette, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
Blake Canfield, Louisiana Department of Natural Resources
Mark Davis, Tulane Law School
Susan Margaret Floyd, Entergy
Brandon Frey, Public Service Commission
Tyler Gray, Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil & Gas Association
Monique Hardin, Deep South Center for Environmental Justice
Timothy Hardy, Breazeale, Sachse, & Wilson, LLP
Faye Matthews, National Wildlife Federation
Karen Sokol, Loyola Law School
Erin Spears, New Orleans City Council
Harry Vorhoff, Governor’s Office of Coastal Activities
Tokesha Collins-Wright, Louisiana Chemical Association

SCIENCE ADVISORY GROUP
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Dr. Virginia Burkett, United States Geological Survey (Co-chair) (Non-Voting Member)
Dr. Mark Zappi, University of Louisiana at Lafayette (Co-chair)
Dr. Raj Boopathy, Nicholls State University
Dr. Carrie Castille, United States Department of Agriculture
Dr. Monica Farris, University of New Orleans
Dr. Kimberly Foster, Tulane University
Dr. Jean Fotie, Southeastern Louisiana University
Dr. Chang Jeong, Louisiana State University
Dr. Richard Keim, Louisiana State University
Dr. Alex Kolker, Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium
Eric Smith, Tulane University
Dr. Camille Stagg, United States Geological Survey
Dr. Kalliat Valsaraj, Louisiana State University
Dr. Mehdi Zeidouni, Louisiana State University
Dr. Peng “Solomon” Yin, University of Louisiana Lafayette

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

142

Appendix A. Dissent
Action
Number
1.1

1.2

1.4

1.5

1.6

2.4

Action Name
Adopt a Renewable and
Clean Portfolio Standard
and create a statewide
market for Renewable
Energy Certificates

Task Force Member
Name (Affiliation)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)
Greg Bowser (LCA)

Improve electric generation
resource planning and
procurement to streamline
the retirement and
replacement of energy
resources
Establish utility green tariffs

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Explore the role of Power
Purchase Agreements and
deregulating power
generation in the energy
transition

Greg Bowser (LCA)

Develop a regional longrange transmission
infrastructure plan to meet
Louisiana’s transmission
goal
Evaluate an Emission
Reduction Generation and
Supply (ERGS) program

Greg Bowser
(LCA)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Jonathan Bourg
(Entergy Louisiana)

Greg Bowser (LCA)

Reason for Dissent
A “clean” portfolio standard includes nuclear & fossil fuel technologies that employ
CCUS, all of which have serious environmental justice concerns and are incompatible
with equity, a stated goal of the plan. CCS would require a new pipeline buildout that
would harm Louisiana’s coast and people.
LCA is concerned that Action 1.1 may serve to negatively impact investment in projects,
which leads to concerns about future reliability of power supply and power generation.
To the extent any such standard is adopted, there should be no limitation on the
amount of clean power.
"Low carbon hydrogen” includes blue hydrogen. During the CITF meeting on October
26, 2021, the state's data showed that the inclusion of blue hydrogen actually
increased total greenhouse gas emissions. A 2021 Stanford study found that blue
hydrogen produced more GHG emissions than coal.
"Clean energy” includes nuclear and fossil fuel technologies that employ CCUS. These
energy sources have serious environmental justice concerns and are incompatible with
equity, a stated goal of the plan. CCS is unproven and could help lock in existing toxic
fossil fuel infrastructure.
LCA supports Action 1.5 but believes it should be clarified to include not just renewable
power but also clean power. Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) for clean power
should be included in the request to the LPSC, because such resources will have few, if
any, emissions by 2050.
The LPSC is the appropriate entity to regulate PPAs, industrial access and/or wheeling
and compensation for co-generation, and has expressed its views in prior proceedings.
This regulation is necessary to maintain electric grid reliability and does not impede
reasonable carbon reduction efforts.
LCA does not believe that specific percentage goals for transmission expansion should
be included, as they are premature. Instead, transmission expansion should be based
on transmission planning studies, which consider factors such reliability, cost/benefits
of the proposed investment, the particular needs of renewable and clean energy
projects, resiliency associated with severe weather events, etc.
LCA supports Action 2.4 but believes it should be revised so it is clear that it is not
limited only to renewable power. Based on the most recent edits to the Portfolio, the
Action now appears to limit its application to renewable power which LCA believes may
have been in error.

143

Action
Number

3.3

3.4

Action Name

Advocate for a national
carbon price and explore
joining a multi-state carbon
pricing system to advance
GHG emissions reduction
and direct proceeds toward
the advancement of
strategies in the Louisiana
Climate Action Plan
Develop and enforce a Net
Zero Industry Standard

Task Force Member
Name (Affiliation)
Jonathan Bourg
(Entergy Louisiana)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Greg Bowser (LCA)

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

4.1

Set Industry Efficiency
Standards

Greg Bowser (LCA)

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

5.1

Accelerate electrification of
industrial processes and
equipment through pilot
projects, incentives, and
requirements

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Greg Bowser (LCA)

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

Reason for Dissent
The LPSC is the appropriate entity to regulate PPAs, industrial access and/or wheeling
and compensation for co-generation, and has expressed its views in prior proceedings.
This regulation is necessary to maintain electric grid reliability and does not impede
reasonable carbon reduction efforts.
GCCLP supports a cap on carbon emissions but objects to a trading regime. Trading
programs allow companies to buy the right to pollute, potentially allowing for the
continued emission of other toxic pollutants in environmental justice communities.
Offsets can also allow for double counting.

Rather than increased regulations, LCA supports a market-based approach. LCA has
concerns this Action may lead to the outsourcing of GHG emissions to states that have
less restrictions. This would negate any emissions reductions achieved within the
State, but it could also harm Louisiana’s economy and potential cost the jobs of
thousands of Louisianans.
LMOGA fully supports the efforts and commitments being made by industry to reach
Net Zero Emissions by 2050. In this case, LMOGA objects to the changes made to this
action after the comment period with little apparent basis in submitted Action
Proposals or CTF input. See CTF Dissent Supplement.
LCA believes that market forces, and not increased regulation, will be the primary
driver for achieving greater efficiency. LCA believes that increased regulation may serve
to stifle the innovation and creativity necessary to achieve energy efficiency.
Efficiency enhancements through advancements in technology will be critical to
reaching industry’s net zero goals. The market (specifically profitability and the will of
shareholders) is the most powerful driver for efficiency across industry, as opposed to
mandates. See CTF Dissent Supplement.
LCA believes that technology to promote and accelerate gasification should take place
through market forces, and not through a regulatory framework. Increased regulation
has the potential to stifle creativity, innovation, and competition.
LMOGA feels better results could be achieved through state support of the
development of low-carbon infrastructure, new technologies and market creation. See
CTF Dissent Supplement.

144

Action
Number
5.2

Action Name
Promote low-carbon
alternative fuels and
feedstocks for
petrochemical industrial
processes

Task Force Member
Name (Affiliation)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)
Flozell Daniels, Jr.
(FFL)
Rob Verchick
(Loyola)

5.3

Support the safe and
responsible deployment of
carbon capture, utilization,
and storage for highintensity and hard-to-abate
emissions

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)
Flozell Daniels, Jr.
(FFL)
Rob Verchick
(Loyola)
Shirell ParfaitDardar (Tribal
Chief)
Camille ManningBroome (CPEX)

5.4

Invest in research for
utilizations of captured
carbon and life cycle

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Reason for Dissent
"Low carbon hydrogen” includes blue hydrogen. During the CITF meeting on October
26, 2021, the state's data showed that the inclusion of blue hydrogen actually
increased total greenhouse gas emissions. A 2021 Stanford study found that blue
hydrogen produced more GHG emissions than coal.
The practice of advancing low-carbon alternatives is unacceptable in the context of
necessary emission reductions. "Clean" hydrogen, or blue hydrogen, has been shown to
increase greenhouse gas emissions; carbon capture storage and sequestration
processes claiming to be "clean" are widely unproven.
Fuel switching must exclude “low-carbon H,” a term that includes so-called “blue H,”
which relies on CCS. Say researchers at Cornell & Stanford: “The greenhouse gas
footprint of blue hydrogen is more than 20% greater than burning natural gas or coal
for heat.” https://bit.ly/3rxNfzo. Do no harm.
CCUS incentives have already cost the Department of Energy $1.1 billion, despite most
of the projects failing. CCUS locks in toxic infrastructure that is harming LA
communities. CCUS pipelines would destroy Louisiana’s coastal wetlands, one of our
most important protections from hurricanes.
Carbon capture, utilization, and storage projects are extremely costly with negligible
emission reduction benefits. Deployment and expansion of facilities and infrastructure
for these technologies within concentrated industrial corridors will increase harm and
injustice in Louisiana communities.
The technology is unproven. It would endanger EJ communities, harm wetlands, delay
renewables, & require big subsidies. It’s reductive effects for LA would be small but
would draw imported waste from others. LA must not become the carbon landfill for the
rest of the country. https://bit.ly/3tE2NEI
Pipelines pose known environmental and health hazards. Installing additional pipelines
for CCUS through fragile coastal wetlands, home of Indigenous communities and
estuaries further contributes to historical injustices and genocide. See the American
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Dissent- Action assumes a safe & responsible CCUS buildout is possible in vulnerable
communities/ecosystems without existing supporting evidence or adequate &
meaningful public engagement. This is not an action that will benefit the well-being &
quality of life for LA's most vulnerable communities.
New markets for captured CO2 would create more incentives for companies to
continue extracting fossil fuels, which is the cause of the climate crisis and responsible
for numerous public health problems in Louisiana communities near petrochemical
infrastructure.

145

Action
Number

Action Name
analyses to understand
their overall impact

Task Force Member
Name (Affiliation)
Flozell Daniels, Jr.
(FFL)
Rob Verchick
(Loyola)

5.5

Develop Industrial Cluster
Decarbonization Plans to
plan for and direct facilitylevel investment

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Rob Verchick
(Loyola)
Camille ManningBroome (CPEX)
6.2

Explore how circular
economy principles can be
applied to lifecycles of
products created and used
in Louisiana
Hold former well operators
accountable for orphaned
wells

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

7.2

Strengthen financial
security requirements for
plugging wells

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

8.1

Enact methane waste rules

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

7.1

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

Reason for Dissent
Louisiana has limited resources to invest in tangible, effective emission reduction
pathways. Instead of researching ways to subsidize creative carbon accounting,
Louisiana universities should advance research on implementing proven renewable
technologies across Louisiana’s economy and environment.
CCU seldom cuts carbon permanently. Infrastructure will harm EJ communities. CCU
includes enhanced oil recovery, which results in the burning of more oil and emissions.
Fuels and feedstocks will someday be burned or deteriorate, sending emissions back
into the air. https://bit.ly/3tE2NEI
Based on this section and many comments at CITF meetings, the state sees “industrial
clusters” as an economic opportunity. But these areas are “sacrifice zones” where
Louisiana’s residents are suffering from increased pollution, and the state should look
to wind down production in these areas.
For the reasons stated above, the White House EJ Advisory Council voices strong
opposition to carbon capture and finds it will not provide any “benefit” to communities.
https://bit.ly/3tE2NEI There is no way to “meaningfully consider concerns of nearby
communities” and promote CCUS hubs.
Dissent – While seeking economies of scale laudable, I dissent this action because,
taken with other actions in this plan, it promotes CCUS hubs. We feel there is no way to
“meaningfully consider concerns of nearby communities” and promote CCUS hubs.
This action seems to promote the recycling of plastic, which has mostly been
unsuccessful and has led to increased plastic pollution. "Advanced recycling" will
increase air pollution. The portfolio should call for an end to the production of
unnecessary plastic.
LMOGA is certainly supportive of addressing orphaned wells, and we actively
participate in the OSR Commission and CLEER. However, we object to the inclusion of
“creating… a right of action for landowners… to sue” because Louisiana currently has
this authority under R.S. 30:29 and 30:80, et seq.
The rationale for action proposals 166 & 168 references an outdated report. The
legislature has superseded several recommendations from that report, addressing
funding, needed improvements to the law, and creating state level committees to
review the process.
LMOGA dissents due to reference and connection to Action 3.4. See CTF Dissent
Supplement.

146

Action
Number
8.2

Action Name
Establish methane
monitoring stations in the
GHG Monitoring Program

Task Force Member
Name (Affiliation)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

9.1

Shift public fleets to low and
zero-emission vehicles

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

9.3

Prepare for the expanded
availability of alternative
fuels for waterborne
transport, medium- and
heavy-duty vehicles, and
aviation
Develop crediting
mechanism and market
specific to blue carbon
Encourage sustainable
forest management and
greater use of Louisiana
forest products for
construction
Teach, re-train, and employ
Louisiana residents in clean
energy sectors
Promote and invest in
Louisiana-based low-carbon
industries, including
specialized worker training
and long-term economic
development planning to
recruit, develop, and retain
firms and workers.

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

15.3
16.7

18.2
19.1

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)
Flozell Daniels, Jr.
(FFL)
Rob Verchick
(Loyola)

Reason for Dissent
The most effective way to reduce leaks is not constant monitoring. It’s to eliminate
fossil fuel extraction. This is not a minor disagreement about wording; it indicates that
the state may misunderstand what is causing the climate crisis, which is the extraction
of fossil fuels.
Renewable diesel is largely made from industrial grains such as corn and soybeans,
which generate agricultural pollution that creates harmful algae blooms and hypoxic
zones, including the Dead Zone off the coast of Louisiana. These hypoxic zones harm
Louisiana fisheries and fisherfolk.
Renewable diesel relies on synthetic fertilizers, the production of which harms
environmental justice communities. "Alternate fuel" includes natural gas, methane, and
biofuels. Natural gas is a major contributor to the climate crisis and biofuels increase
agricultural pollution and deforestation.
Louisiana must conserve its wetlands as a matter of good climate and coastal policy.
Selling coastal wetlands for offsetting allows for continued greenhouse gas emissions
and other pollution in other places where that pollution should be eliminated.
GCCLP objects to the inclusion of wood pellets as a climate solution. The wood pellet
industry is increasing deforestation in our region, and burning wood for energy releases
more greenhouse gas emissions than coal.
"Clean energy" includes false solutions such as blue hydrogen and CCS. "Alternative
fuels" includes natural gas, methane, and biofuels. Natural gas is a major contributor
to the climate crisis and biofuels increase agricultural pollution and deforestation.
GCCLP objects to the inclusion of low-carbon hydrogen, which includes blue hydrogen.
Blue hydrogen is worse for the climate than coal.
Louisiana has limited staff capacity within agencies and higher learning institutes;
workforce development and economic development planning resources should
prioritize coastal restoration, water management, and renewable energy sectors,
reducing Louisiana’s vulnerability to global market shifts.
LA’s efforts here must exclude “low-carbon H,” a term that includes so-called “blue H,”
which relies on CCS. Say researchers at Cornell & Stanford: “The greenhouse gas
footprint of blue hydrogen is more than 20% greater than burning natural gas or coal
for heat.” https://bit.ly/3rxNfzo. Do no harm.

147

Action
Number
20

26.2

26.3

27.2
28.1

Action Name
Ensure Louisiana is
prepared to maximize
potential federal funding
opportunities
Solicit a study to more
comprehensively
understand potential
impacts of CCUS technology
and infrastructure on
communities, ecosystems,
and cultural resources to
inform siting and permitting
deployment
Collaboratively develop
regulatory frameworks and
statewide siting plans for
new energy technologies
with considerations for both
climate and environmental
justice
Ensure that the Climate
Initiatives Task Force
continues…
Establish a Louisiana GHG
monitoring program

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Task Force Member
Name (Affiliation)
Colette Pichon
Battle (GCCLP)

Reason for Dissent

Rob Verchick
(Loyola)

This assumes “siting and permitting” of CCUS, technologies that in the best-case
scenario would have minimal effect reducing LA’s footprint, would harm EJ
communities and wetlands, and require lg and permanent subsidies. There are so
many more, better ways to spend than chasing this “loss leader.”
Dissent – As drafted, the Action assumes CCUS buildout is a foregone conclusion
regardless of the impacts incurred on communities, ecosystems, and cultural
resources.

Camille ManningBroome (CPEX)

Blue/gray hydrogen and carbon capture are false solutions that will harm Louisiana
communities and degrade the environment. The state should not pursue them,
regardless of federal incentives.

Shirell ParfaitDardar (Tribal
Chief)

Does not require following Federal Laws or Declarations, such as: United States
Constitution - Article VI or the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples. This must be required to ensure responsibility and accountability.

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

The executive branch currently has the authority to meet the objectives of this action,
and codifying it via statute jeopardizes opportunities for meaningful change based on
evolving market conditions.
DEQ currently has and exercises the authority to require monitoring where they feel it is
necessary.

Tyler Gray (LMOGA)

148

Appendix B. Meeting List
2020

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
2021

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

November 9: Climate Task Force meeting #1
December 1: Transportation Sector Committee meeting #1
December 4: Agriculture, Forestry, Conservation and Waste meeting #1
December 7: Legal Advisory Group meeting #1
December 7: Land Use, Buildings, and Housing Sector Committee meeting #1
December 8: Equity Advisory Group meeting #1
December 8: Finance Advisory Group meeting #1
December 11: Science Advisory Group meeting #1
December 14: Manufacturing and Industry Sector Committee meeting #1
December 14: Power Production, Distribution, and Use Sector Committee meeting #1
December 15: Mining, Oil, and Gas Sector Committee meeting #1
December 21: Climate Task Force meeting #2
January 25: Climate Task Force meeting #3
February 24: Climate Task Force meeting #4 – All Hands meeting with AGs and SCs
March 10: Agriculture, Forestry, Conservation and Waste meeting #2
March 11: Power Production, Distribution, and Use Sector Committee meeting #2
March 12: Manufacturing and Industry Sector Committee meeting #2
March 16: Mining, Oil, and Gas Sector Committee meeting #2
March 17: Land Use, Buildings, and Housing Sector Committee meeting #2
March 19: Transportation Sector Committee meeting #2
March 23: Legal Advisory Group meeting #2
March 24: Finance Advisory Group meeting #2
March 26: Equity Advisory Group meeting #2
March 29: Science Advisory Group meeting #2
April 14: All Hands Sector Committee sessions 1 & 2
April 15: All Hands Sector Committee sessions 3 & 4
April 16: All Hands Sector Committee sessions 5 & 6
May 4: All AG “Office Hours” meeting #1
May 17: Agriculture, Forestry, Conservation and Waste meeting #3
May 21: Transportation Sector Committee meeting #3
May 24: Power Production, Distribution, and Use Sector Committee meeting #3
May 26: Land Use, Buildings, and Housing Sector Committee meeting #3
May 27: Mining, Oil, and Gas Sector Committee meeting #3
June 2: Manufacturing and Industry Sector Committee meeting #3
June 8: Climate Task Force meeting #5
July 20: Science Advisory Group special meeting
July 29: Climate Task Force meeting #6
August 27: All Advisory Group “Office Hours” meeting #2
September 30: Equity Advisory Group special meeting
October 8: Climate Task Force special meeting #1

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

149

•
•
•
•
2022

•
•

October 19: Climate Task Force special meeting #2
October 20: LA EPS Tool Launch meeting
October 26: Climate Task Force meeting #7
December 16: Climate Task Force meeting #8
January 11: Climate Task Force meeting #9
January 31: Climate Task Force meeting #10

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

150

Appendix C. Summary of Submitted Action Proposals
Action
Number
1
2
3

Action Proposer Name

Action Name

Dr. Stephen Barnes
Billie Golan
Benson Langlinais, Ron Harrell

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Jacob Pohlman
Eric Smith
Eric Smith
Daniel Dehon
Amanda Richey
Michael D. Moffitt
Bob Murrell
Dr. Terrence Chambers, Gregory Sigue
Ann Vail, Sam Lehr
University of Louisiana Monroe
Michael Johnson
LA Dept. of Agriculture & Forestry/Office
of Soil & Water Conservation
Linda Baynham
Robert Desmarais Sullivan
Camille Manning-Broome, Jeannette
Dubinin, Kim Marousek, Rachelle
Sanderson
Camille Manning-Broome, Jeannette
Dubinin, Angie Fyfe
Camille Manning-Broome, Jeannette
Dubinin, Dr. Terrence Chambers, Logan
Atkinson-Burke, Simon Mahan

Freight Low Carbon Mode Shift
Soils as a Carbon Sink
Curtail and capture agricultural GHG emissions through voluntary, market-incentive based
strategies
Support Composting and gardening efforts to reduce GHG
Conversion of CO2 into stable, marketable compounds
Conversion of CO2 into green Methane
Clearing up regulatory barriers that govern carbon capture and sequestration
Support a National Carbon Price Policy
Develop a Plan and Partners for Modular Nuclear Power Pilot Program in Louisiana
Cover the Superdome roof in solar panels
Equal Opportunity for Landowners of Louisiana and Government Accountability Action Plan
Increase the Development and Use of Renewable Natural Gas (RNG)
An alternative for reducing climate change emissions for diesel and gas powered vehicles
Banning Gas powered vehicles to be sold by 2030
Reduction of Agricultural Methane Emissions through Ruminant Feeding Supplements

16
17
18

19
20

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

1. Increased energy efﬁciency programs in state. 2. Example of major project.
Elimination of tax exemptions for petrochemical industry
Create a statewide framework and authority to guide land use practices and manage land use
and natural systems holistically for coordinated decision-making.
Reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and create economic activity through capacity-building
and development of local governments climate action plans.
Develop a model solar ordinance for adoption by local governments to support GHG emission
reduction goals and increase predictability of local impacts of solar industry investments.

151

Action
Number
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

43

Action Proposer Name

Action Name

Jasmine Gorowara, Srinee Bajaj
Thomas Parish, Bob Gray, Jake Frank
Brian Bond, Dr. Terrence Chambers,
Matt White
"American Biocarbon CT, LLC"
Dr. Eric Kalivoda
Kyla Cheynet, Robby Toombs, Buck
Vandersteen
Ann Vail, Dr. Eric Kalivoda
Lucien Cutrera
Andy Kowalczyk
Ann Elizabeth Maier

Cargo hold wash water disposal
Fuel Additive: increases efficiency reduces emissions
Provide the Training Necessary to Support the Growth of the Local Clean Energy Industry

Buck Vandersteen, Robby Toombs, Kyla
Cheynet
Greg J. Gasperecz
Robby Toombs, Kyla Cheynet, Buck
Vandersteen
LA Conservation Partnership
Ann Vail, Dr. Eric Kalivoda
Stephen C. Poss
LA Conservation Partnership
LA Dept. of Agriculture & Forestry/Office
of Soil & Water Conservation
LA Dept. of Agriculture & Forestry/Office
of Soil & Water Conservation
Dr. Eric Kalivoda
LA Dept. of Agriculture & Forestry/Office
of Soil & Water Conservation, USDANRCS,LSU Ag Center
Marylee Orr,Dr. Slawo Lomnicki

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Biocarbon Distribution for Increased Crop Yield and Permanent Carbon Sequestration
Expand Broadband Access to Reduce Travel
Utilization of low-value forest based fiber to effect positive carbon outcomes.
Expand Availability of Alternative Fuels
Convert State vehicles to electric
Decarbonizing Louisiana Through Electrification
Reviewing expansion of extractive industries in the state. Moving to responsibility in corporate
tax payment, repair of environmental damage, ending of racial injustice.
Provide market driven strategies to keep forest land forested and encourage greater use of forest
products for construction.
Reduce Idling and Poor Driving of Publicly Owned Vehicles
Provide outreach and education on GHG mitigation to timberland owners.
Poultry Litter Distribution
Convert Public Fleet to Alternative Fuels
Green Land/lawn care
Louisiana Irrigation and Dewatering Pump Conversion for Emissions Reduction
Louisiana Conservation Delivery Program
State Climate Mitigation Program for landowners
Promote Transportation-Related Energy Conservation in the Public Sector
Louisiana State Conservation Innovation Program - Incentive Based Tools

Industrial Flaring Transition to Energy Recovery

152

Action
Number
44
45
46

Action Proposer Name

Action Name
Offset Transportation Sector GHG Emissions through Natural Sequestration
Offset Transportation Sector GHG Emissions through Carbon Capture and Storage
Cumulative Assessment of Industry Risks on Vulnerable Communities

47
48
49
50

Dr. Eric Kalivoda
Dr. Eric Kalivoda
"Larry Sorapuru, Jr. ", Victoria Peluso, Dr.
Adrienne Katner
Tokesha Collins-Wright
Tokesha Collins-Wright
Tokesha Collins-Wright
"Dr. Peng ""Solomon"" Yin"

51

Hunter Johnson

52

Dr. Anthony Laska

53
54

Glen Lyons
Chanda Johnson, Breigh Rhodes, Dr.
John Underwood, Claire Anderson
Michael Beck

55
56
57
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

66

Brent Newman, Charles Allen
Brent Newman, Charles Allen
Kosmos Energy LLC
Tierra Foundation
Brent Newman, Charles Allen
Margo Moss, Kendra Valerius
Julie Olson
Water Wise Gulf South Policy and
Advocacy Committee
Dr. Fallon Aidoo, Kim Marousek, Mark
Goodson, Rachelle Sanderson, Rachelle
Trahan
Chief Shirell Parfait-Dardar

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Renewable Energy Power Purchase Agreements
Carbon Pricing
Carbon Capture and Storage
State-wide building energy code program for energy efficiency and sustainability improvement in
building sectors
Creating a State Carbon Intensity Database to Measure decarbonization of Industry at the State
Level
Reducing net grid emissions through efficiencies of Combined Heat & Power and District Heating
& Cooling
Economy-wide Carbon Pricing Consideration
The Louisiana RPP Program: Catalytic Funding and Support for Transdisciplinary, ResearchBased K–12 Climate Education Projects
Revenue Decoupling for Utilities
Renewable Portfolio Standard for the State of Louisiana
Net energy metering for solar panels in Louisiana
Blue Carbon Commercialization: Biogeochemical Model Development Phase II
Augmenting State Monitoring Regimes for Blue Carbon
Promote Offshore Wind as an Economic Engine for Louisiana
An Industry Certification Program for Emissions Reduction Activities by Louisiana Industry
Level Playing Field for Energy and Industrial Investments
Advancing Green Infrastructure to Combat Greenhouse Gas Emissions and to reduce Flood Risk
Linking land use and transportation planning for compact development patterns

Preservation, Equity and Future Generations

153

Action
Number
67

Action Proposer Name

Action Name
The Skywood Carbon Economy

83
84

"Winston Wade Riddick, Jr.", "Winston
Riddick, Sr."
Justin Kozak
Jessica Kemp
Jessica Kemp
Rhoman Hardy
Rhoman Hardy
Nathan McBride
Nathan McBride
CSRS Inc.
Nathan McBride
Nathan McBride
CSRS Inc.
Alicia Brown
Connie Porter Betts
Dr. E. deEtte Smythe, Sabrina Schenk,
Carl Cleland
Randy Pausina
Ann Vail, Manies Brooks, Julie Brooks

85
86
87

Randy Pausina
Randy Pausina
Ross Liner

88

Gulf South for a Green New Deal Policy
Table

89

Dr. Anthony Laska

68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
81
82

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Floodplain, wetland, and riparian corridor conservation, restoration, and expansion of all
Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMTs)
Expand implementation of Complete Streets
Renewable Power Choice in Louisiana
Plastics Circular Economy: Plastics Recycling for use in Manufacturing & Industry Sector
GHG Reduction Property Tax Exemption
Increase Adoption of CCUS
Statewide Energy Efﬁcient Program
Leveraging Technology for Leak Detection
Leverage Carbon Offset Potential of Coastal Restoration Projects
Incorporate green space and green infrastructure into buildings and developments
Pay As You Save® (PAYS®)
Continue DOTD Program to Reduce GHG through Carpooling, Telecommuting & Similar Initiatives
Coastal Marsh Restoration Using Re-purposed Materials of Opportunity for Carbon Sequestration
& Community Resilience
St Tammany Transportation GHG Mitigation Action
Implementing a targeted incentive program to accelerate the widespread deployment of electric
yard trucks in Louisiana
Bottles to Beaches
Living Shorelines for Oxygen Creation
Healthy Resilient Buildings Initiative: Develop Policies, Programs, and Projects to create a
healthier & secure work environment for employees and an awareness campaign for the citizens
of the Parish
Creating an Office of Sustainable Agriculture within the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and
Forestry that will provide workforce development and training, marketing assistance, support for
the transition to sustainable and regenerative practices, and access to land and markets for
small farmers who use sustainable and regenerative practices to build climate resilience.
Purchase of CHP electricity from Industry by Public Utilities

154

Action
Number
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103

Action Proposer Name

Action Name

Adam Peltz, Scott Anderson, Dan
Grossman
Adam Peltz, Scott Anderson

Reducing methane emissions from equipment leaks and malfunctions at oil and gas production
and compression facilities throughout Louisiana through leak detection and repair (LDAR)
Including and coordinating Equity/Environmental Justice policy for Carbon Capture and
Sequestration (CCS) across regulatory agencies and divisions
Expand inclusive economic opportunity through efforts to reduce Louisiana's emissions, expand
and diversify our economy, and build a more just and resilient future
Renewable Energy and Sustainable Aviation Fuels
Enable Access to Resources Outside Urban Centers
Permit Streamlining for Decarbonization Projects
Corporate Decarbonization Tax Incentives
Hydrogen Investment Income Tax Credit
Outreach and Education Regarding Shifts That Will Occur in the Green Transition of
Transportation
Idle Reduction Incentives for State Fleets
Accelerating the Offshore Wind Opportunity for Louisiana
Help property owners improve building energy performance
Create a Louisiana Climate Justice Department.

Flozell Daniels, Liz Williams Russell,
Caressa Chester, Asti Davis
Scott Gammel
Flozell Daniels, Asti Davis
CF Industries
CF Industries
CF Industries
Flozell Daniels, Asti Davis

104
105

Ann Vail
Jaime Simmons
Nathan Lott
Louisiana Policy Table of Gulf South for a
Green New Deal
Nathan Lott
Caressa Chester

106
107
108
109

Dr. Eric Kalivoda, Connie Porter Betts
Tyler Herrmann, Ann Vail
Bill Robertson
Dr. Mehdi Zeidouni

110

LDAF-Office of Soil & Water
Conservation, LDEQ Solid Waste
Division, LSU Ag Center, LSU SeaGrant
Katherine King
Jonathan Bourg

111
112

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Leading by example with public buildings
Eliminate fossil fuels to the extent practicably possible, by making alternatives more feasible and
less expensive
Continue Congestion Reduction Programs
Increase the Development and Use of Biodiesel and Renewable Diesel
Climate Rankings for Electric Utilities and Large Industrial Facilities
Containment Verification in CO2 Geological Storage Projects via Pressure and Temperature
Monitoring
Beneficial Use of Agricultural Wastes

Green Power Purchase Tariff (GPPT)
Accelerated decommissioning of generation

155

Action
Number
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129

Action Proposer Name

Action Name

Logan Atkinson-Burke
Simon Mahan, Logan Atkinson-Burke
Jonathan Bourg, Bill Robertson, Logan
Atkinson-Burke
Brian Bond
Logan Atkinson-Burke

Renewable Tax Incentive
Electric Generation Resource Planning Improvements
Climate Score Report for Public Utilities

130

Katherine King
Logan Atkinson-Burke
Robbie Laborde
Robbie Laborde
Simon Mahan, Logan Atkinson-Burke
Simon Mahan, Logan Atkinson-Burke
Katherine King
Jonathan Bourg
Jessica Hendricks, Logan Atkinson-Burke
Logan Atkinson-Burke
Angelle Bradford
Louisiana Policy Table of Gulf South for a
Green New Deal
Andrew Mangan

131

Jane Patton, Logan Atkinson-Burke

133
134
135
136
137
138
139

Z Smith
Z Smith
Z Smith
Harriet Tregoning
Harriet Tregoning
Alex Posorske
Dr. Chao Wang

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Retirement of existing resources and addition of new resources
Amend existing Market Based Mechanism to require both all-source competitive solicitation and
a loading order requirement.
Demand Response – Industrial/Commercial Interruptible Power Tariffs (IPT)
Energy Efficiency Resource Standard
CCS Initiative - Streamlined Permitting & Project Advocacy
Carbon Capture and Sequestration (CCS) Initiative
Long Range Transmission Planning
Transmission Planning Seams Coordination
Emission Reduction Generation and Supply (“ERGS”)
Advanced Power Generation Technologies
Community Solar Incentive and Support
Peak Demand Reduction Goal
Transit Equity as a Civil Right and Public Good
The Sunshine Project: People’s Assemblies for Economic Development
Establish a carbon credit system linked to the existing water quality trading program established
in Louisiana.
Louisiana Abandoned Well Administration Pilot Act: an Abandoned Well Administration Pilot
Program
Keeping Louisiana up to date on building & energy codes
Energy benchmarking for State buildings
Buy Clean Louisiana
Position LA for multiple federal funding opportunities
School Bus Electrification
Increase statewide transit ridership via increased financial support for transit operations
Industrial facility forklift and manlift electrification

156

Action
Number
140
141
143

Action Proposer Name

Action Name
Energy auditing of industrial facilities - Requirement and regulation
Carbon-Free Louisiana: Prioritizing carbon-light opportunities over the myth of carbon capture
Light Duty Vehicle / Vessel Electrification Incentive

153
154
155

Dr. Chao Wang
Jane Patton, Logan Atkinson-Burke
Louisiana Policy Table of Gulf South for a
Green New Deal
Stephen Wright
Stephen Wright
Stephen Wright
Stephen Wright
Dr. Alex Kolker
Dr. Alex Kolker
Dr. Alex Kolker
Louisiana Policy Table of Gulf South for a
Green New Deal
Gulf Coast Center for Law & Policy
Gulf Coast Center for Law & Policy
Gray Stream

156
157
158

Hunter Johnson
Monica Rowand
Monica Rowand

159

Monica Rowand

160
161
162
163

Monica Rowand
Monica Rowand
Monica Rowand
Gulf States Renewable Energy Industries
Association
Gulf States Renewable Energy Industries
Association

144
145
146
147
149
150
151
152

164

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Third Party Power Purchase Agreements
State-Wide Renewable Portfolio Standard
Property-assessed clean energy Financing
Solar Tax Credit
Black Carbon: A Particulate-Phase Greenhouse Forcing
Monitoring Greenhouse Gas Fluxes With Big Data
Monitoring Methane With Remote Sensing And Data Science
Equitable disaster planning (i.e., mitigation and preparedness) and recovery process for parishes
and municipalities.
Just transition for workers
Funding public compost facilities with a fertilizer tax
Development of carbon storage hubs for the permanent storage of carbon dioxide (CO₂) from
industrial facilities, such as Project Minerva, a carbon storage project in Southwest Louisiana.
Pore Space Acquisition Policy for Public Lands Owned by the State of Louisiana
Zero emission vehicles requirements for state vehicles
State-wide energy efficiency programs for residential and commercial buildings (like Energy
Smart New Orleans or the USDA program)
Development of organics compost programs and incentives for sustainable and regenerative
agriculture practices
Incentives for waste diversion (or disincentives for landfill)
Emissions reductions requirements for state entities
Renewable energy portfolio standards for utilities
Energy and Storage Economic Incentives
Net Metering

157

Action
Number
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178

Action Proposer Name

Action Name

Gulf States Renewable Energy Industries
Association
Adam Peltz, Kristi Trail, Andy Jacoby,
Brent Campbell
Adam Peltz, Kristi Trail, Andy Jacoby,
Brent Campbell
Adam Peltz, Kristi Trail, Andy Jacoby,
Brent Campbell
Adam Peltz, Kristi Trail, Andy Jacoby,
Brent Campbell
Katherine King
Katherine King
Logan Atkinson-Burke
Brian Bond
Simon Mahan, Logan Atkinson-Burke
Jonathan Bourg
Brian Bond
Andreanecia Morris
Andreanecia Morris

Transmission Infrastructure

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

Improve Oilfield Site Restoration Fund funding to P&A wells
Ensure that former operators are held responsible for their orphan wells
Improve financial security to ensure legacy sites are plugged and cleaned up
Reform "future utility" laws and rules to prevent inactive wells from unduly lingering unplugged
Renewable/Zero-Emission Purchase and Utilization Transaction (“RPUT”)
Virtual Power Purchase Agreement (“VPPA”)
Renewable Portfolio Standard
Carbon Cap and Trade
Louisiana Energy Storage Target
Utility Customer Additional Facility Offerings
Microgrids
Weatherization and efficiency for residential properties
Emergency housing trust fund for rebuilding after disaster

158

Appendix D. Executive Order

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

159

Appendix E. Task Force Votes

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

164

References

1 IPCC. (2018). Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the

impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global GHG emission pathways, in
the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development,
and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla,
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E.
Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland. https://www.ipcc.ch/2018/10/08/summary-for-policymakers-of-ipcc-special-report-on-globalwarming-of-1-5c-approved-by-governments/
2 National Archives and Records Administration. (2015, March 31). FACT sheet: U.S. reports Its 2025
Emissions target to the UNFCCC. National Archives and Records Administration.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2015/03/31/fact-sheet-us-reports-its-2025emissions-target-unfccc; The United States Government. (2021, April 22). FACT sheet: President Biden Sets
2030 GHG pollution reduction TARGET aimed at Creating GOOD-PAYING union jobs and Securing U.S.
leadership on clean energy technologies. The White House. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefingroom/statements-releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-pollutionreduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-paying-union-jobs-and-securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energytechnologies/.
3 Keeney, R. L. (1982). Decision Analysis: An Overview. Operations Research, 30(5), 803–838.
4 Keeney, R. L. (2004). Making Better Decision Makers. Decision Analysis, 1(4), 193–204.
https://doi.org/10.1287/deca.1040.0009
5 LSU Center for Energy Studies (2021). Louisiana 2021 GHG Inventory.
https://www.lsu.edu/ces/research/greenhousegasreport2021.php
6 LSU Center for Energy Studies (2021), Appendix 4.
7 LSU Center for Energy Studies (2021), Table 1.
8 IPCC. (2021a). Summary for Policymakers. In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_SPM.pdf
9 NASA. (2021). “Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet.” Retrieved August 4, 2021.
https://climate.nasa.gov/
10 NASA. (2021)
11NASA. (2021)
12 IPCC. (2021)
13 The Economist. (2019). “Global economy will be 3 percent smaller by 2050 due to lack of climate
resilience.” Retrieved August 13, 2021. https://www.eiu.com/n/global-economy-will-be-3-percent-smaller-by2050-due-to-lack-of-climate-resilience/
14 U.S. Global Change Research Program. (2018). Summary Findings. Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change
Research Program. https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_Ch01_Summary-Findings.pdf
15 National Academies of Sciences, engineering, and Medicine. (2019). Framing the Challenge of Urban
Flooding in the United States. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
https://doi.org/10.17226/25381; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2017).

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

166

“Greater Impact: How disasters Affect People of Low Socioeconomic Status.” Disaster Technical Assistance
Center Supplemental Research Bulletin. https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/dtac/srb-low-ses_2.pdf
16 IPCC. About the IPCC. https://www.ipcc.ch/about/
17 IPCC. (2021a)
18 IPCC. (2021a)
19 IPCC. (2021a)
20 IPCC. (2021a)
21 IPCC. (2021b). Headline Statements from the Summary for Policymakers. In Climate Change 2021: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Headline_Statements.pdf
22 U.S. Global Change Research Program. (2018)
23 U.S. Global Change Research Program. (2018)
24 Carter, L., A. Terando, K. Dow, K. Hiers, K.E. Kunkel, A. Lascurain … P. Schramm. (2018a). Southeast. In
impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II
[Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterlig, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, B.C. Stewart (eds.)]. U.G.
Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 743-808. Doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH19
25 Carter et al. (2018a)
26 Carter et al. (2018a)
27 Carter et al. (2018a)
28 Lempert, R. J., J. R. Arnold, R. S. Pulwarty, K. Gordon, K. Greig, C. Hawkins-Hoffman … C. Werrell. (2018).
Chapter 28: Adaptation Response (pp. 1309–1345). Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH28
29 Ebi, K. L., J. Balbus, G. Luber, A. Bole, A. R. Crimmins, G. E. Glass … J. L. White-Newsome. (2018). Chapter
14: Human Health. Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH14
30 Schwartz, J. (2021). “More Than a Third of Heat Deaths Are Tied to Climate Change, Study Says.” The New
York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/31/climate/heat-deaths-climate-change.html
31 Hsu, A., G. Sheriff, T. Chakraborty, D. Manya. (2021). Disproportionate exposure to urban heat island
intensity across major US cities. Nature Communications. 12: 2721. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-02122799-5
32 Kochanek, K. D., S. L. Murphy, J. Xu, E. Arias. (2017). Mortality in the United States, 2016. NCHS Data Brief
No. 293. Hyattsville, MD. National Center for Health Statistics
33 Hajat, S., M. O’Connor, T. Kosatsky. (2010). “Health effects of hot weather: From awareness of risk factors to
effective health protection.” The Lancet. 375: 856–863. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61711-6
34 National Safety Council. (2021). “Hot Car Deaths.” https://injuryfacts.nsc.org/motor-vehicle/motor-vehiclesafety-issues/hotcars/
35 Baurick, T. (2020). “These Louisiana cities are getting more weeks of “extreme heat” than 50 years ago.”
Retrieved August 13, 2021. https://www.nola.com/news/environment/article_62d2f2c0-d68b-11ea-b38047e14569dcf6.html
36 Climate Central. (2021). “Hot Zones: Urban Heat Islands.” Research Brief, Climate Central.
https://medialibrary.climatecentral.org/uploads/general/2021_UHI_Report.pdf
37 Dahl, K., E. Spanger-Siegfried, R. Licker, A. Caldas, R. Cleetus, S. Udvardy … P. Worth. (2019). “Killer Heat in
the United States.” Retrieved August 13, 2021. https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/killer-heat-united-states-0

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

167

38 ,Nowak, D. J., E. J. Greenfield. (2018). Declining urban and community tree cover in the United States. Urban

Forestry & Urban Greening. 32: 32–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2018.03.006
39 Plumer, B., N. Popovich, B. Palmer. (2020). “How Decades of Racist Housing Policy Left Neighborhoods

Sweltering.” The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/08/24/climate/racismredlining-cities-global-warming.html
40 Hsu et al. (2021)
41 Hoffman, J. S., V. Shandas, N. Pendleton. (2020). The Effects of Historical Housing Policies on Resident
Exposure to Intra-Urban Heat: A Study of 108 US Urban Areas. Climate. 8: 12.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cli8010012
42 Gamble, J.L., M. Balbus, K. Berger, V. Bouye, K. chief Campbell, A. Conlon … A. F. Wolkin. (2016). Ch. 9:
Populations of Concern. In The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific
Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, 247-286.
http://dx.dor.org/10.7930/J0Q81B0T
43 Gamble et al. (2016)
44 Morano, L. H., T. L. Bunn, M. Lackovic, A. Lavender, G. T. T. Dang, J. J. Chalmers … D. D. Flammia. (2015).
Occupational heat-related illness emergency department visits and inpatient hospitalizations in the southeast
region, 2007-2011. American Journal of Industrial Medicine. 58: 1114-25. Doi: 10.1002/ajim.22504
45 Carter, L. M., A. Terando, K. Dow, K. Hiers, K. E. Kunkel, A. Lascurain … P. J. Schramm. (2018b). Chapter 19:
Southeast (pp. 743–808). Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH19
46 LDH 2020
47Louisiana Department of Health. (2021). “LDH: Hurricane Ida storm-related death toll rises to 26.”

https://ldh.la.gov/news/6308
48 Nolte, C. G., P. Dolwick, N. Fann, L. W. Horowitz, V. Naik, R. W. Pinder … L. H. Ziska. (2018). Chapter 13: Air

Quality (pp. 512–538). Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH13
49 Nolte et al. (2018)
50 USEPA. (2016). What Climate Change Means for Louisiana (No. EPA 430-F-16-020; p. 2). U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/201609/documents/climate-change-la.pdf
51 Nolte et al. (2018)
52 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020a). “Air Pollution”.
https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/air_pollution.htm
53 CDC. (2020a)
54 Selin, N.E., S. Wu, K.-M. Nam, J.M. Reilly, S. Paltsev, R.G. Prinn, M.D. Webster. (2009). Global Health and
Economic Impacts of Future Ozone Pollution. Environmental Research Letters, 4: 1-9
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/4/4/044014)
55 Baurick, T. (2019). “Welcome to “Cancer Alley,” Where Toxic Air Is About to Get Worse.” Retrieved August 13,
2021. https://www.propublica.org/article/welcome-to-cancer-alley-where-toxic-air-is-about-to-getworse?token=D-hB2_O0QLMHW5Kl6il0gvvvLf5CcyUl
56 Novak, R., L. Jantarasami, R. Delgado, E. Marino, S. McNeeley, C. Narducci … L. Singletary. (2018). Ch 13:
State of the Sector, Ozone Air Quality. Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/13/
57 Nolte et al. (2018)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

168

58 Gamble et al. (2016)
59 Gamble et al. (2016)
60 EPA (2021)
61 Nolte et al. (2018)
62 Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry. (2013). “Forestry Protection Programs”.

https://www.ldaf.state.la.us/forestry/protection/
63 Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry. (2013)
64 Nolte et al. (2018)
65 The Lancet Microbe. (2021). Climate change: fires, floods, and infectious diseases. 2(9): e415. Doi:
https:doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(21)00220-2
66 Baker, R. E., A. S. Mahmud, I. F. Miller, M. Rajeev, F. Rasambainarivo, B. L. Rice …C. J. E. Metcalf. (2021).
Infectious disease in an era of global change. Nature Reviews Microbiology. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579021-00639-z
67 CDC. (2020b). Preparing for the Regional Health Impacts of Climate Change in the United States: A
summary of health effects, resources, and adaptation examples from health departments funded by CDC’s
Climate and Health Program (p. 38). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
Environmental Health.
68 Baker et al. (2021)
69 Baker et al. (2021)
70 Baker et al. (2021)
71 Baker et al. (2021)
72 Ebi et al. (2018)
73 Ebi et al. (2018)
74 Ebi et al. (2018)
75 Novak, R., L. Jantarasami, R. Delgado, E. Marino, S. McNeeley, C. Narducci … L. Singletary. (2018). Chapter
15: Tribes and Indigenous Peoples (pp. 572–603). Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_Ch15_Tribes-and-Indigenous-Peoples_Full.pdf
76 Novak et al. (2018)
77 Novak et al. (2018)
78 EPA (2021).
79 EPA (2021).
80 AP NEWS. (2020). “Louisiana, Alaskan tribes file UN climate change complaint.” Retrieved August 13, 2021.
https://apnews.com/article/b324677e542281b23d811554dba6cd79
81 Carter et al. (2018)
82 Tu, D. L. (2021). “This Louisiana Tribe Lost Most of its Homes to Hurricane Ida. ‘This was the Big One.’”.
https://pulitzercenter.org/stories/louisiana-tribe-lost-most-its-homes-hurricane-ida-was-big-one
83 Parker, H. (2021). “For Louisiana’s coastal tribes, ‘being at the end of the earth is a dangerous place.’”
https://www.nola.com/news/environment/article_8751e728-0d8a-11ec-9fa1-cb44d2a508a1.html
84 Chavez, R. (2021). “Why some Indigenous tribes are being left behind in Louisiana’s Ida recovery.”
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/nation/why-some-indigenous-tribes-are-being-left-behind-in-louisianas-idarecovery
85 Chavez. (2021).
86 Carter et al. (2018)

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

169

87 Duplican, T. (n.d.). “An Update on Addressing Saltwater Intrusion in the “2,000-ft” Sand in the Baton Rouge

Area: Looking Toward the Future.” Retrieved August 13, 2021.
https://www.lsu.edu/lwrri/conferences/2016/saltwater-intrusion.php
88 CPRA. (2017). Louisiana’s comprehensive master plan for a sustainable coast: Committed to our coast (p.
392). Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority.
http://www.icevirtuallibrary.com/doi/abs/10.1680/cmsb.41301.0034
89 Jervis, R. (2014). Louisiana bays and bayous vanish from nautical maps. Retrieved August 13, 2021.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/02/12/noaa-maps-disappear-coastalerosion/5259611/
90 Carter et al. (2018)
91 Bhatia, K. T., G. A. Vecchi, T. R. Knutson, H. Murakami, J. Kossin, K. W. Dixon, C. E. Whitlock. (2019). Recent
increases in tropical cyclone intensification rates. Nature Communications. 10: 635.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08471-z
92 Erdman, J. (2020). “Hurricane Delta Fastest on Record to Rapidly Intensify from Tropical Depression to
Category 4 in Atlantic Basin.” Retrieved August 13, 2021. https://weather.com/storms/hurricane/news/202010-06-hurricane-delta-rapid-intensification-among-most-intense
93 Carter et al. (2018)
94 Carter et al. (2018)
95 USCFTC. (2020). Managing Climate Risk in the U.S. Financial System (p. 196). Market Risk Advisory
Committee of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-09/9-920%20Report%20of%20the%20Subcommittee%20on%20Climate-Related%20Market%20Risk%20%20Managing%20Climate%20Risk%20in%20the%20U.S.%20Financial%20System%20for%20posting.pdf
96 Smith, A. B. (2021). “2020 U.S. billion-dollar weather and climate disasters in historical context.” Retrieved
August 13, 2021. https://www.climate.gov/news-features/blogs/beyond-data/2020-us-billion-dollar-weatherand-climate-disasters-historical
97 NOAA. (2020). “Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters: Overview.” Retrieved August 13, 2021.
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/
98 Smith (2021)
99 U.S. Global Change Research Program (2018)
100 CPRA (2017)
101 Barnes, S, S. Virgets. (2017). “Regional Impacts of Coastal Land Loss and Louisiana’s Opportunity for
Growth. LSU Economics & Policy Research Group.” Retrieved December 10, 2021.
https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/LSU-EPRG-Regional-Economic-Land-Loss-Risks-and-Opportunities2017.pdf
102 First Street Foundation. (2020). The First National Flood Risk Assessment: Defining America’s Growing Risk
(p. 163). First Street Foundation.
https://assets.firststreet.org/uploads/2020/06/first_street_foundation__first_national_flood_risk_assessmen
t.pdf
103 U.S. Energy Information Administration. (2021). “Louisiana State Energy Profile.”
https://www.eia.gov/state/print.php?sid=LA
104 Wood, M. (2021). “Oil refining’s four big challenges: profitability, rationalization, decarbonization and EVs.”
https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-edge/oil-refining-four-big-challenges/

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

170

105 Seba, E. (2021). “Phillips 66 puts Alliance, Louisiana refinery up for sale.”

https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/phillips-66-puts-alliance-louisiana-refinery-up-for-sale-2021-08-25
106 Shell. (n.d.). “Shell Convent Refinery.” Retrieved August 13, 2021. https://www.shell.us/about-us/projects-

and-locations/shell-convent-refinery.html
107 Seba (2021)
108 Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (n.d.). “Healthy People 2030. Social Determinants of
Health.” https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/social-determinants-health.
109
IPCC. (2018). Summary for Policymakers (p. 24). IPCC. Retrieved from IPCC website:
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/05/SR15_SPM_version_report_LR.pdf
110 IEA. (2021). Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector (p. 224). International Energy Agency.
Retrieved from International Energy Agency website: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/beceb956-0dcf4d73-89fe-1310e3046d68/NetZeroby2050-ARoadmapfortheGlobalEnergySector_CORR.pdf
111 US Department of Energy (2021). Secretary Granholm Launches Hydrogen Energy Earthshot to Accelerate
Breakthroughs
Toward
a
Net-Zero
Economy.
Retrieved
from
website:
https://www.energy.gov/articles/secretary-granholm-launches-hydrogen-energy-earthshot-acceleratebreakthroughs-toward-net
112 Ebi et al. (2018)

Thompson, John. Clean Air Task Force. Overview the process of capture, transport, and storage.
October 2021. Presentation to the Louisiana Climate Initiatives Task Force, October 2021.
113

https://gov.louisiana.gov/assets/docs/CCI-Task-force/October21/CTF8_JohnThompson_REVISED.pdf
114 Nolte, C. G., Dolwick, P., Fann, N., Horowitz, L. W., Naik, V., Pinder, R. W., … Ziska, L. H. (2018). Chapter 13:
Air Quality (pp. 512–538). Washington D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH13
115 Making Waves. (2017). Retrieved August 13, 2021, from OpportunityLouisiana.com website:
https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/eq/q2-2017/making-waves?v
116 IEA (2021)

Ashmoore, Olivia, Robbie Orvis, Zack Subin, Nathan Iyer, Lainie Rowland, Kyle Clark-Sutton, and
Jun Shepard. November 2021. “Louisiana Energy Policy Simulator Insights: Current Emissions
Trajectory,
NDC
Scenario.
Energy
Innovation.
https://energyinnovation.org/wp117

content/uploads/2021/11/Louisiana-Energy-Policy-Simulator-Insights-Current-Emissions-Trajectory-NDCScenario.pdf
118 AP NEWS. (2021, July 2). 7 big solar farms proposed in rural Louisiana by 2024. Retrieved August 13, 2021,
from
AP
NEWS
website:
https://apnews.com/article/la-state-wire-louisiana-business5312f82aeb16abcaceb1116e412a9905
119 Musial, W., Tegen, S., Driscoll, R., Spitsen, P., Roberts, O., Kilcher, L., … Beiter, P. (2019). Survey and
assessment of the ocean renewable resources in the US Gulf of Mexico (No. OCS Study BOEM 2020-017; p. 82).
New Orleans, LA: Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Contract No.: M17PG00012. Retrieved from Bureau of
Ocean
Energy
Management,
Contract
No.:
M17PG00012
website:
https://espis.boem.gov/final%20reports/BOEM_2020-017.pdf
120 NREL.gov. (2020, May 6). Two NREL Studies Find Gulf of Mexico Well Positioned for Offshore Wind
Development.
Retrieved
August
13,
2021,
from
NREL.gov
website:
https://www.nrel.gov/news/program/2020/studies-find-gulf-of-mexico-well-positioned-for-offshore-winddevelopment.html

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

171

121 Thompson, R. (2015, September 19). Two Louisiana firms playing important roles in creation, construction

of
offshore
wind
farm.
Retrieved
August
13,
2021,
from
NOLA.com
https://www.nola.com/news/business/article_0d0bf749-63cf-56a0-86d5-c448cc9fe035.html

website:

Louisiana Economic Development. Delta Biofuel Proposes $70 Million Renewable Fuel Plant in
Jeanerette.
June
28,
2021.
https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/led-news/news-

122

releases/news/2021/06/28/delta-biofuel-proposes-$70-million-renewable-fuel-plant-in-jeanerette

Louisiana Economic Development. Louisiana Green Fuels Plans $700 Million Renewable Diesel
Refinery in Caldwell Parish. April 23, 2021. https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/led-news/newsreleases/news/2021/04/23/louisiana-green-fuels-plans-$700-million-renewable-diesel-refinery-in-caldwellparish

Louisiana Economic Development. Grön Fuels in Louisiana Names Nation’s No. 2 Deal by Business
Facilities.
January
7,
2021.
https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/led-news/newsreleases/news/2021/01/07/gr%C3%B6n-fuels-in-louisiana-named-nation-s-no.-2-deal-by-business-facilities

Louisiana Economic Development. Air Products Announces $4.5 Billion Blue Hydrogen Clean Energy
Complex.
October
14,
2021.
https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/led-news/newsreleases/news/2021/10/14/air-products-announces-$4.5-billion-blue-hydrogen-clean-energy-complex

Louisiana Economic Development. Venture Global to Invest Over $10 Billion to Develop LNG Facility in
Cameron.
December
2,
2021.
https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/led-news/newsreleases/news/2021/12/02/venture-global-to-invest-over-$10-billion-to-develop-lng-facility-in-cameron

Ashmoore, et al (2021)
Larson, John, Whitney Herndon, Galen Hiltbrand, and Ben King. The Economic Benefits of Carbon
Capture: Investment and Employment Estimates for Regional Carbon Capture Deployment Initiative
States. Rhodium Group. October 2020. https://rhg.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/The-Economic123
124

Benefits-of-Carbon-Capture-State-Investment-and-Employment-Estimates_Phase-I.pdf

Baurick, Tristan. “A Win-win’: Plugging Louisina’s 4,300 ‘orphaned’ wells could boost industry, cut
emissions. The Advocate. July 22, 2020. https://www.nola.com/news/environment/article_6209ccc2125

cc33-11ea-98b3-6ff39d64c7c1.html

LED. Two Louisiana Projects Among Finalists in EDA’s $1 Billion ‘Build Back Better’ Challenge.
December
13,
2021.
https://www.opportunitylouisiana.com/led-news/news-

126

releases/news/2021/12/13/two-louisiana-projects-among-finalists-in-eda-build-back-better-challenge
127

Dismukes, David. Louisiana 2021 GHG Inventory. LSU Center for Energy Studies. 2021.

https://www.lsu.edu/ces/publications/2021/louisiana-2021-greehouse-gas-inventory-df-rev_reduced.pdf

IPCC 2021
Peters, Adele. In New Orleans, a solar microgrid is keeping lights on in this affordable apartment
building. Fast Company. September 2, 2021. https://www.fastcompany.com/90671663/in-new-orleans-a128
129

solar-microgrid-is-keeping-lights-on-in-this-affordable-apartment-building

Horowitz, Andy. Can This Cajun-Punk Musician Protect His Culture from Climate Change? Rolling
Stone. September 16, 2021. https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-features/can-this-cajun-punkmusician-protect-his-culture-from-climate-change-1226895/.
Get Lit Stay Lit: Resilient Restaurants for the Future of New Orleans. Feed the Second Line and Glass
Half Full NOLA. https://www.feedthesecondline.org/getlitstaylit
130

Louisiana Climate Action Plan, 2022

172

