Minnesota’s
Climate Action
Framework
cc-mn4-01

From the Governor
Climate change is an existential threat for all people in Minnesota. That’s why Lieutenant
Governor Flanagan and I created the Climate Change Subcabinet and Advisory Council on
Climate Change — to seek input from thousands of Minnesotans across the state and help
us take action together. Through these partnerships, we can protect the things we love about
Minnesota — our clean air and water, our health, our outdoor traditions, and our four seasons.
This Climate Action Framework includes ambitious goals that will harness the power of
Minnesota’s innovative spirit and small businesses to create thousands of well-paying jobs
and develop the next generation of climate-smart technologies.
We can do this together while ensuring that everyone — including neighborhoods that have
been historically marginalized — can thrive in Minnesota.
This framework is Minnesota’s next step in responding to climate change, but it will not be our
last. We will use the Climate Action Framework to work with tribal nations, the legislature,
cities, counties, and communities to build ambitious solutions that reflect the urgency of the
issue and ensure all Minnesotans benefit. We will not be moving forward alone.
We know this framework will guide us to a cleaner, safer future for all Minnesotans. I invite
you to join us in making that future possible.
In solidarity,
Governor Tim Walz

2

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Climate Change Subcabinet is grateful to the 11 tribal sovereign
nations in the state of Minnesota and their respective staff and to the
Governor’s Advisory Council on Climate Change for their review and
input on the framework.
Thanks also to the thousands of Minnesotans who participated in the
process by writing comments and participating in surveys to share what is
most important to them.
The subcabinet also thanks the members of six working groups for their
important contributions to each goal chapter. Teams of staff and leadership
from each of the 15 subcabinet agencies wrote this framework based on
their expertise and the critical input from Minnesotans. Working group
members and agency staff are listed at the end of the framework.

3

Contents

The important role and leadership
of tribal nations

22

Goal 1: Clean transportation

25

10

Goal 2: Climate-smart natural and
working lands

32

Climate affects everyone,
but some are hit harder

11

Goal 3: Resilient communities

41

Working together to meet global goals

13

Goal 4: Clean energy and efficient buildings

49

The opportunity

14

Goal 5: Healthy lives and communities

56

Minnesota today

16

Goal 6: Clean economy

62

What’s next

18

Vision

5

Executive summary

6

Minnesota is changing

9

Leading with action

Supporting documents

Summary of climate actions
Greenhouse gas analysis
Summary of input

These are available at mn.gov/framework

Acronyms and glossary

4

The climate vision for our state
The vision for our state embodied in this framework is:

Carbon-neutral

By 2050, Minnesota substantially reduces greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
balances any GHG emissions with carbon storage, especially in our landscapes.

Resilient

Minnesota communities, businesses, and the natural environment can prepare,
respond to, and recover from the impacts of climate change so all Minnesotans can
thrive in the face of these challenges.

Equitable

Minnesotans acknowledge and address inequitable and inaccessible systems that
contribute to some communities experiencing disproportionate climate change
impacts; ensure fair distribution of the costs and benefits of action now and to
future generations; and ensure meaningful participation in planning.
To get there, we all have a role to play.
This Climate Action Framework outlines priorities and next steps to help Minnesota achieve
this vision. The framework also invites you, your organization, and your community to join us to
achieve a shared vision.

5

Executive summary
Climate change is happening now, and we are on course for
more frequent, widespread, and intense weather events with
cascading and complex effects. Communities, businesses, and
individuals across Minnesota are acting to reduce our climatechanging pollution and build resilience against future changes.
However, there is more work to do.
We must act now. The international body that assesses the
science of climate change, called the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC), issued “a code red for humanity”
last year, saying that urgent action is required if we are to ward
off the worst consequences of a warming climate and keep
global temperature increases below 1.5 degrees Celsius (about
2.7 degrees Fahrenheit). Scientists warn that exceeding this
temperature increase will result in long-lasting, irreversible
changes and make parts of the planet uninhabitable. In
addition, once we exceed those temperature thresholds,
opportunities for successful adaptation rapidly diminish.
A guide for the years ahead. The Climate Action Framework
sets a vision for how Minnesota will address and prepare for
climate change. It identifies immediate, near-term actions we
must take to achieve our long-term vision of a carbon-neutral,
resilient, and equitable future for our state. The framework is a
foundational document designed to broadly guide the direction
of climate action in the state for many years.

Many people and groups weighed in. The Climate
Change Subcabinet is publishing this framework to
advance our conversation with Minnesotans on the work
we all must do to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and build resilient communities across our state. The
framework is informed by public input received as a part
of previous climate work,
as well as specific input
received throughout the
framework development
process beginning in
2021. The document
was shaped by input
from the 11 tribal nations
who share Minnesota’s
geography and the
Governor’s Advisory
Council on Climate
Change. Through the
winter and spring of 2022, the subcabinet convened
workgroups to provide detailed input on each of the
framework chapters. The subcabinet also shared its
proposals broadly and received more than 130 written
comments and nearly 3,000 responses to online surveys.
(See Appendix 3 for more information.) All this input
contributed to the final document.

6

The framework is organized
around six goals
1. C
 lean transportation: Connect and serve
all people through a safe, equitable, and
sustainable transportation system.
2. C
 limate-smart natural and working lands:
Enhance climate benefits by absorbing and
storing carbon, reducing emissions, and
sustaining resilient landscapes.
3. R
 esilient communities: Provide each
Minnesota community with tools to plan for
and become resilient to its unique climate
impacts.
4. C
 lean energy and efficient buildings:
Expand the use of carbon-free energy and
create healthy, comfortable buildings that
are cheaper to operate and pollute less.
5. Healthy lives and communities: Protect the
health and wellbeing of all Minnesotans in
the face of climate change.
6. C
 lean economy: Build a thriving carbonneutral economy that produces goods and
services with environmental benefit and
equitably provides family-sustaining job
opportunities.

Within each goal
• A
 summary of the challenges
• P
 riority actions and larger
initiatives needed to achieve
the goal
• M
 easures to help gauge our
progress
• E
 quity considerations and
opportunities for addressing
them
Moving forward, the subcabinet
will continue to seek input,
report on our progress, and
revisit and refine action
steps as we implement the
framework. Next steps include
identifying lead agencies and
setting priorities for the action
steps in Appendix 1 and seeking
authorities and funding as
needed.

Interconnected goals
and collaboration
The framework goals are
interconnected: Work in one
area of our lives may create
opportunities — or challenges ­­—
in another. We must collaborate
across sectors to ensure that all
outcomes are considered.
What effect will electric vehicles
have on demand for renewable
energy? If we adopt newer, less
polluting technologies, how do
we manage the waste from the
old technologies? Are the newer
technologies being manufactured
sustainably or are they creating new
environmental challenges?
We need a diversity of people and
perspectives to ensure thoughtful
and effective action. By working
together we can address trade-offs
and build solutions that work for all
Minnesotans.

7

Summary

Goals and their
related initiatives
Clean
transportation

Resilient buildings, infrastructure, and business:
Help the built environment and local economies
become more resilient to climate change.
Clean energy and
efficient buildings

Healthy lives and
communities

Investments in emerging crops, products, and local
economies: Support emerging agricultural and forest
technologies and products that reduce waste, create
jobs, and expand economic opportunities.

Healthy communities: Protect communities from the
direct and indirect health effects of climate change.
Climate-smart public health and healthcare systems:
Bolster public health resources and promote
strategies to reduce GHGs from health care
facilities.

Healthy farmland: Accelerate soil health and
nitrogen and manure management practices that
reduce emissions and enhance carbon storage, water
quality, and habitat.
Sustainable landscapes and water management:
Reduce GHGs and improve landscape resiliency
through multipurpose water storage and
management practices that protect farmland, water
supplies, and infrastructure.

Clean energy: Transition to 100% carbon-free,
reliable, and affordable electrical power and heat
through policies, investments, and partnerships.
Smarter buildings and construction: Reduce GHG
emissions in the building sector by promoting
conservation, efficiency, and lower-carbon design,
materials, and fuels.

Carbon sequestration and storage in forested lands,
grasslands, and wetlands: Manage forests, grasslands
and wetlands for increased carbon sequestration and
storage.
Resilient landscapes and ecosystems: Enhance the
ability of plants and animals, including crops, to adapt
to the effects of climate change.

Climate-smart communities: Build the capacity
of Minnesota communities to protect against and
withstand the effects of climate change.
Healthy community green spaces and water
resources: Expand and protect tree canopies;
parks and other green spaces; and lakes, rivers, and
wetlands that provide community resilience benefits.

Connected communities: Maintain and improve
multimodal transportation connections to reduce
emissions and congestion.
Clean and efficient vehicles: Accelerate the
transition to electric vehicles, alternative fuels, and
greater fuel efficiency.

Climate-smart
natural and
working lands

Resilient
communities

Clean economy

Business innovation and entrepreneurship: Invest
in research and development, innovation, and
partnerships.
Equitable access to jobs and a just transition:
Support workers to adapt and evolve their skills
through inclusive strategies, ensuring familysustaining jobs.

8

Minnesota is changing
Minnesota’s climate has changed and will continue
to change, affecting the health and economy of our
communities. Frequent and intense storms — now
occurring more often than at any time on record — are
damaging homes, businesses, infrastructure, farms, and
natural resources, and the trend is projected to continue.
Record-breaking floods, like those in Duluth in 2012
and Faribault in 2010 and 2016, have damaged streets,
wastewater facilities, businesses, and homes, costing local
governments, business owners, and residents millions of
dollars in cleanup and repairs.
Huge wildfires in Canada and the western U.S., brought
on by changing conditions, have caused unhealthy air
quality in our state. Minnesota lakes have lost an average
of 10 to 14 days of ice cover in the past 50 years, affecting
lake and fish health, outdoor recreation opportunities,
and business owners. Climate change effects are harming
wildlife habitat, like those of trout and walleye. Beloved
northern tree species such as spruce, aspen, black ash,
and birch are expected to decline. Minnesota’s state grain,
wild rice (manoomin, psíŋ), and the habitats it supports are
also affected. In addition, our health is threatened by more
floods, longer allergy seasons, warmer temperatures, and
expanded tick ranges.

Minnesota is getting warmer,
especially winter nights in
the northern parts of the
state.
Change in daily average minimum
temperature during winter (DecFeb), 1895-2021.

Minnesota is getting wetter,
especially the southern parts
of the state.
Annual
precipitation
change by
watershed for
2000-2019,
compared to
20th century
averages.

9

Leading with action
We can build climate
solutions that work for
Minnesota.

The Climate Action Framework identifies immediate actions to help both avoid the worst impacts
of climate change and become resilient to the changes ahead. To reduce the severity of future
climate-change impacts, we must reduce GHG emissions in every sector of our economy by:
• Accelerating our transition to clean energy
• Improving energy efficiency and using clean energy in buildings and industrial processes
• Developing more efficient modes of transportation and producing cleaner fuels
• Reducing emissions from activities on natural and working lands
• Building carbon storage in forests and soils
Technological tools, such as electric vehicles, wind and solar energy, and better battery storage,
are helping us limit climate change, while creating jobs and boosting the economy. But technology
alone won’t solve our climate change challenges. We also need smart planning and new ways of
working and collaborating. Investments in job training, grants to organizations to build expertise,
and peer-to-peer learning among businesses are just some examples of how we build skills and
create opportunities across the state. We also need to support communities planning for and
implementing new technologies, so they are prepared to capitalize on innovations.
Partners across Minnesota are already leading with action. Local and tribal governments
are prioritizing climate adaptation planning, expanding urban and community forests, and
transitioning to clean energy. Our utilities are taking bold steps to phase out coal plants and
increase investments in renewable energy. Large and small businesses have committed to
reducing their emissions and developing the technology that will help others worldwide reduce
their emissions.

10

Climate change affects everyone,
but some are hit harder.

Let’s acknowledge: Some
people carry a bigger
burden.

People at higher risk from climate change due to social, economic, historical, and political
factors have less ability to prepare for, cope with, and recover from climate change impacts.
Groups at greater risk from the effects of climate change include:
• Indigenous people and tribal nations

• People who are socially and economically
disadvantaged

• Older adults and children

• Pregnant people

• People with disabilities and chronic illnesses

• People who are incarcerated

• People in rural areas
• People without housing

• Future generations

• People of color

For instance, people with lower incomes; Black, Indigenous, and people of color; and tribal
nations are exposed to higher levels of pollution due to ongoing structural racism and
inequitable policies and decision-making processes. Conversely, some Minnesotans will benefit
from economic opportunities related to climate change and have greater access to climatechange decision-making. Addressing these inequities and understanding the experiences of
high-risk communities is essential to making Minnesota more resilient and prosperous.

11

Inequalities & climate change
Unequal exposure to pollution: Black, Indigenous, people of color, and
residents with low incomes are more likely to live near industrial sites
and highways, with elevated exposure to air pollution that increases their
vulnerability to climate-related health impacts. Children, older adults, and
people with underlying health conditions may also see poor health outcomes
from degraded air quality, excessive heat, increased pollen, and wildfire smoke.
Technology deficits: Rural communities may lack access to broadband
and other technologies, impeding their full participation in the economy,
education, and decision-making.
Barriers to energy-efficient housing and improvements: Long-term
discrimination against Minnesotans of color in home buying has limited their
access to money-saving home weatherization programs and energy-efficiency
upgrades. Rental property owners have little incentive to invest in these
upgrades that benefit tenants.
Uncertain access to resources: Climate change threatens many of the natural
resources and landscapes that Indigenous communities, recent immigrant groups,
and others depend on for subsistence foods and deep cultural connections.
Higher costs: Higher home energy bills during very hot summers
disproportionately affect people with low incomes.

12

Working together to meet global goals
Along with many other states and countries, Minnesota
will work to meet the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) greenhouse gas reduction goals.
This includes:
• Reducing GHG emissions by 50% by 2030
• Achieving net-zero emissions by 2050
The IPCC also recognizes that climate adaptation
reduces risk, enhances resilience, and provides cobenefits. The next 10 years is the most effective
timespan to get this done. Once temperatures escalate
over 1.5 degrees Celsius, opportunities for successful
adaptation rapidly diminish.
These global goals are ambitious. Meeting them
will require Minnesota to increase efforts to better
understand current conditions, improve data on GHG
emissions and storage, implement the Framework’s
action steps, and identify new approaches, technologies,
and partnerships. The framework lays the foundation to
meet these targets, but will not get Minnesota all the
way there. To achieve these reductions, we will need the
efforts of federal, tribal, state, and local governments,
businesses, nonprofits, and individuals all working
together to rapidly cut climate pollution.

13

The opportunity
Acting to prevent and prepare for climate change is a chance to make
Minnesota a better place to live for all. It is a once-in-a-generation
opportunity to create new jobs for Minnesotans, support innovation,
and protect our health and environment.
We have already seen our state economy grow while decreasing GHG
emissions. We know that investing in clean energy and a sustainable
future will help Minnesota continue to grow and become more
resilient and equitable for all Minnesotans. Climate action can help
create well-paying jobs and save consumers, businesses, and taxpayers
money.
• W
 eatherizing homes and buildings will employ workers, reduce
energy use, and lower Minnesotans’ energy costs.
• I ncreasing wind production could lower property taxes and provide
additional revenue for rural Minnesota counties.
• Installing and maintaining thousands of new electric vehicle
charging stations will bring more jobs to communities across
Minnesota.
• E
 xpanding our forests and urban tree canopy to reduce the impacts
of rising temperatures will require the expertise of foresters.
The farms, forests, grasslands, and wetlands that stretch across
our state are natural parts of our climate solutions. Expanding
sustainability initiatives, voluntary action incentives, and emerging

14

markets provide opportunities to strengthen rural economies, build
climate resilience, deliver ecosystem benefits, protect water quality,
improve soil health, and help our farmers and forest landowners
continue to meet the demand for food and natural resources. We can’t
meet our goals without climate-smart land management practices.
Storing more carbon in both natural and working lands can help us slow
the carbon buildup in our atmosphere.
There will be many jobs in sectors commonly considered part of the
growing clean economy, such as electric vehicles, energy efficiency,
and sustainability, and expanded job opportunities in more traditional
areas of Minnesota’s economy, such as agriculture, forest products,
manufacturing, natural resource management, and construction.
Across these sectors, workers will be needed to develop new products,
implement new land management practices, grow and maintain trees,
improve our heating and cooling systems, retrofit our existing buildings,
engineer interconnected alternative energy systems and efficiency
improvements, upgrade our electricity transmission grid, and more.

More benefits of
climate action
Reducing the number of fossil-fuel vehicles on the
road will have an immediate impact on air quality,
especially in urban areas.
Incentivizing regenerative agricultural helps
farmers meet consumer demands and protects
water quality.
Growing native plants and shade trees reduces
heat islands and improves air quality.
Developing our clean economy, especially in
underserved communities, helps bridge longstanding wealth gaps.

Acting on climate change is also an opportunity to protect our
environment and improve our health. Preserving and growing our
forestland will store carbon and improve access to the outdoors for all
Minnesotans. Reducing pollution from our cars can help reduce asthma
rates and other illnesses. Building local food systems will decrease the
climate impact of making meals while providing healthier food options
for our communities.
Integrating policies across all levels of government, coordinating public
and private efforts, and including people across diverse communities
will amplify the impact of our actions. Making progress towards our
carbon-neutral, resilient, and equitable future is critical and depends on
everyone making choices that meet our economic goals while reducing
emissions and prioritizing risk reduction.

15

Minnesota today
Reclaiming our role as
climate leaders.

In 2007, Minnesota was a national leader in climate action with the adoption of the bipartisan
Next Generation Energy Act, setting statutory goals to reduce GHG emissions by 15% from
2005 levels by 2015, 30% by 2025, and 80% by 2050. Minnesota missed its goal in 2015 and
is not on track to meet future goals. Since 2005, overall GHG emissions have declined by
just 8%.
The Next Generation Energy Act also
launched Minnesota’s efforts to track
and analyze GHG emissions across all
parts of our economy. Understanding
emissions sources and trends helps the
state identify priorities and challenges in
reducing GHGs.
Minnesota was once a leader on climate
solutions, and by taking the actions
included in this framework, we will be
again.
Each sector has its own challenges and
opportunities for reducing emissions,
and each is at a very different place in
planning and implementing strategies.
Electricity producers have made
important progress towards the
Next Generation Energy Act goals. In contrast, other sectors are just now beginning to
understand and implement opportunities for reductions.

In Minnesota, the largest sources of GHG emissions are transportation, electricity generation,
and agriculture. While Minnesota has made important progress towards these goals in some
sectors, we must do more to achieve our Next Generation Energy Act goals and reduce our
contribution to global climate change.

16

20 years of climate action in Minnesota
Minnesota has a strong foundation for climate action, and now is the time for our state to
accelerate our work.
2003: Minnesota Climate Change Action Plan: A Framework for Climate Action published.
2007: Next Generation Energy Act created GHG emission reduction goals for the state.
2008: Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group publishes its final report recommending a comprehensive
set of state-level climate policies.
2016: Climate Solutions and Economic Opportunity report identifies near-term emission reduction
opportunities between 2016 and 2030.
2017: Adapting to Climate Change in Minnesota 2017 report identifies efforts by Minnesota state agencies
to address climate change impacts. Minnesota hosts the National Adaptation Forum biennial conference.
2019: Climate Change Subcabinet and Governor’s Advisory Council on Climate Change established.
Governor Walz directs state agencies to engage communities and identify policies to reduce emissions
and build resiliency. In addition, Executive Order 19-27 affirmed the State of Minnesota’s goals to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, waste, energy and fuel consumption, water usage, and the sustainable
procurement of goods and services in government operations.
2021: Legislature passes the ECO Act, a critical update to Minnesota’s Conservation Improvement Program,
creating additional energy efficiency opportunities. Legislature also funds climate adaptation planning
grants for local stormwater, wastewater, and other community-focused resilience projects.
2021: Clean Cars Minnesota rule adopted, preserving access for Minnesotans to the cleanest, most efficient
vehicles and increasing access to EVs.

17

What’s next
The framework will continue
to accelerate climate action in
Minnesota. The conversations and
collaboration in developing the
framework have helped identify
key priorities and critical next
steps in Minnesota’s climate work.
The framework will guide the
state agencies’ priorities in the
coming years. From the actions
identified in the document, we
will develop legislative proposals
for new policies, programs,
and grants. We will identify
new data and analyses that
must be developed and more
conversations we need to have
with Minnesotans.
The following are some of the
initial priorities for action from
the state agencies as we begin
implementing the framework.

Building momentum
The Climate Change Subcabinet is
charged with ensuring meaningful
public engagement, collaboration, and
involvement in policy and strategy
development and implementation. To build
momentum for climate action, we need all
Minnesotans to be informed, invested, and
involved in the effort. Together, we must:
• F
 oster a better understanding of climate
change and its effects, and develop skills
for addressing it
• H
 arness the potential economic,
environmental, and social benefits that
come from taking climate action
• S
 eek climate solutions informed by the
creativity and knowledge of people of all
ages and walks of life

To get there, we need to:
• B
 uild capacity at the state, local, and
individual levels for climate action
through education and training
opportunities

• R
 aise public awareness about the
urgency of climate change and ways to
respond
• Provide access to information and
resources
• Ensure consistent and meaningful
opportunities for participation in
decision-making and implementation
especially for communities who are often
left out of decisions that impact them
• S
 trengthen opportunities for
partnerships and knowledge exchange
to maximize our impact
• Ensure information, opportunities
for participation and decisionmaking, resources, and training are
equitably distributed and actively
include disproportionately impacted
communities
The good news is that these efforts can
be great or small. They can happen at the
State Capitol, city halls, boardrooms, or
at the dinner table. Building momentum
for climate action will require a diversity
of skills, where everyone has something
to contribute.

18

Moving forward, the state agencies will
continue to engage Minnesotans to drive
progress on the framework as well as look for
ways to deepen and improve engagement and
partnerships to ensure that climate action
in Minnesota is collaborative, equitable, and
effective.

Measuring progress
Achieving our vision will require that we track
and report on our progress. The state agencies
have identified key progress indicators with
measurable targets associated with each
goal chapter that will help us understand in
real time whether our efforts are making a
difference.
We will also report on the outcomes of our
proposed action. Which actions are being
implemented and what progress is being
made? What results did we achieve?
As part of its annual update required under
Executive Order 19-37, the subcabinet
will report progress on implementing the
framework to inform our action planning,
demonstrate success, and identify areas that
need greater investment and leadership. As
we tackle the complexities of mitigating and
adapting to climate change, we will continue to
develop the data and information streams that
best describe the work.

Guiding action
The framework is a foundational document
designed to broadly guide the direction of
climate action in the state for many years
to come. The The state agencies will use the
Framework to prioritize legislative proposals,
administrative actions, and engagement
efforts to advance our climate goals. We will
use our measures of progress as well as public
input to guide action planning.
As the subcabinet identifies priorities and
state agencies begin implementation of the
Framework, we will weigh critical elements of
our climate effort, including:
Impact: We will use analysis and the best
science to identify actions with substantial
GHG reduction potential and that address the
greatest resiliency needs.
Equity: We will review policies and strategies
with an equity lens, seek input and collaboration from disproportionately impacted communities, and prioritize actions with the greatest
opportunity for improving equity.
Economy: We will seek opportunities to grow
our clean economy, support a just transition
for workers and communities impacted by
this transition, and expand well-paying jobs.

How the state agencies
will approach our work

REVIEW: Reporting
annually on measures of
progress and progress on
action steps.

IDENTIFY opportunities:
Analyze information from
progress reporting and
collect input from the
Advisory Council and other
members of the public.

PLAN: Revisit and refine
action steps and use
the framework to guide
budgetary decisions,
policies, and legislative
priorities.

EXECUTE: Implementation

Health and environment: We will prioritize
actions that address climate change while
also reducing other harmful pollutants that
damage our environment and our health.

19

Ongoing priorities
The subcabinet has been leading on climate action over the past
several years by advancing policy and budget priorities in the
Legislature and integrating climate action into the operations
of state government. These priorities will continue in the
upcoming year and beyond:
Carbon-free electricity by 2040: It is an ongoing priority for
Walz-Flanagan Administration to achieve 100% carbon-free
electricity and 55% renewable electricity by 2040.
Stormwater management: The state agencies, led by the
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), will continue to prioritize
support for local governments and tribal nations as they adapt
to major rainfall events by providing funding for stormwater
planning and infrastructure investments.
Electric vehicle adoption: The MPCA and Department of
Transportation (MnDOT) will continue to help expand EV
adoption through grants to electrify heavy- and mediumduty vehicles and equipment, installation of EV charging
infrastructure, and implementation of the Clean Cars Minnesota
rule.
Enterprise sustainability: The state agencies lead by example
and aim to reduce GHG emissions by 30% by 2025 from a
2005 baseline. Priorities include purchasing EVs, installing solar
on state properties, and improving energy efficiency of state
buildings.
Transportation options: MnDOT will finalize and implement the
Statewide Multimodal Transportation Plan to expand options for
Minnesotans to bike, walk, roll, and take transit.
Sustainable land management: Continue to manage stateowned lands and provide technical and financial assistance to

other landowners to promote sustainable land management
practices, which enhance climate mitigation and resiliency while
providing additional benefits.

Foundational steps
There are key areas where the subcabinet agencies will
work to further their understanding of the current baseline,
opportunities for action, and potential costs and benefits of
action. Improving our understanding in these areas will provide
critical foundational understanding for future action. The
following are priorities for further exploration:
Natural and working lands data: The MPCA, Department
of Natural Resources (DNR), Department of Agriculture
(MDA), and the Board of Water and Soil Resources (BWSR)
will work to refine and standardize methodologies for tracking
GHG emissions and carbon sequestration and storage on our
landscapes. This is an emerging field of understanding and
Minnesota has an opportunity to be a leader.
Measures of resiliency: The state, with leadership from
the MPCA, DNR, and the University of Minnesota Climate
Adaptation Partnership, is working to further develop metrics to
measure success of adaptation and resiliency strategies, which
will help the state and local communities understand the impacts
of adaptation actions and guide future implementation.
Setting goals for our landscapes: In collaboration with partners
and stakeholders, the DNR, BWSR, MDA, and other state
agencies must establish landscape-level goals for strategic
restoration and management of our forests, grasslands,
wetlands, and peatlands to maximize benefits to the climate,
our environment, and our economy. Working with tribes, local
governments, landowners, and others will be a critical part of
setting goals.

20

Leveraging federal action
The federal government has recently adopted
major climate-related statutes, namely the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(IIJA) and the Inflation Reduction Act. These
critical climate actions direct substantial new
funds towards both reducing GHG emissions
and adapting to our changing climate. These
new investments are in addition to existing
federal funding ­— such as Farm Bill programs,
Pittman-Robertson Act funding, and the Land
and Water Conservation Fund – that support
conservation activities with multiple climate
benefits. The subcabinet will use the framework
to guide us as we develop plans and direct
funds from the federal government. Some of
the major federal policy and funding activities
occurring in the near term include:
National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure
Program (IIJA): MnDOT developed and will
begin implementing a plan that will direct
$68 million of federal funds over the next
five years to develop a long-distance EV fast
charging network across the state.
Transportation resiliency and emissions
(IIJA): MnDOT will be developing plans
for the Carbon Reduction Program and
the Promoting Resilient Operations for
Transformative, Efficient, and Cost-Saving
Transportation Program to increase resiliency
and reduce emissions from transportation,
especially through multimodal transportation
options.

Community forestry (IIJA): The federal
government is providing increased
funding to the DNR to expand
community tree canopy, as well as
partner training and engagement.

Advancing critical policy and
programs
The state agencies continue to enhance
existing policies and programs, as well as
explore, analyze, and engage on possible
new policies and programs. Some of
these critical state actions include:
Sustainability in affordable housing:
Minnesota Housing will enhance the
Qualified Allocation Plan and existing
sustainability standards for buildings
the agency finances to improve energy
efficiency and access to renewables,
while reducing utility bills for residents
and providing a healthier place to live.
Building codes: The Department of
Labor and Industry is conducting a
rulemaking process to adopt the most
current building codes for commercial
and large multi-family residential
dwellings, which will improve the energy
efficiency of these buildings.

practices that improve soil health and
support a healthy climate.
Support emerging farmers: MDA will
explore opportunities to expand and
strengthen existing programs that
support access to suitable farmland for
emerging farmers.
Assistance to local and tribal
governments: The MPCA plans to
increase opportunities to develop
and share resiliency and adaptation
strategies, as well as best practices and
expand community capacity through
programs such as GreenStep Cities and
Minnesota GreenCorps.
Clean fuels standard: The subcabinet,
with leadership from MnDOT and
MDA, continues to analyze and discuss
with stakeholders the opportunities and
challenges of possibly adopting a clean
fuels standard to support the use of
cleaner transportation fuels.
Next generation highways: MnDOT
will explore the opportunities and
challenges of possibly locating
transmission lines in highway right
of ways to efficiently expand the
transmission of clean energy.

Soil health: MDA and BWSR are
increasing technical and equipment
assistance to farmers to implement

21

The important role and
leadership of Minnesota
tribal nations
The Daķota and Anishinaabe, whose cultural, spiritual,
and economic practices are intrinsically woven into this
landscape, hold this land sacred. The relationship that
the Anishinaabe and Daķota people have with the natural
environment is interwoven in cultural identity and traditional
practices. The State of Minnesota recognizes tribal nations
as original stewards of this land and all the relatives within it,
who had thriving and vibrant communities prior to European
settlement.

A shared climate fate
Today, the State of Minnesota shares geography with 11 tribal
nations: Bois Forte Band of Chippewa, Fond du Lac Band
of Lake Superior Chippewa, Grand Portage Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa, Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, Lower Sioux
Indian Community, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, Prairie Island
Indian Community, Red Lake Band of Chippewa, Shakopee
Mdewakanton Sioux Community, Upper Sioux Community,
and the White Earth Nation. In addition, the Ho-Chunk,
Cheyenne, Oto, Iowa, Hidatsa, Arikara, A’aninin, Cree,
Blackfeet, Assiniboine, and the Sac and Fox Tribes all also
acknowledge Minnesota as important to their tribal histories.
The State recognizes and respects tribal sovereignty and

holds itself accountable to
counter the historical and
contemporary injustices
that continue to impact
Indigenous people.

Mni Sota Maķoce
Minnesota comes from
the Daķota name for this
region, Mni Sota Maķoce —
“the land where the waters
reflect the clouds.”

Due to shared geography,
history, and people, the
climate fate of the State
of Minnesota and tribal nations are deeply intertwined.
Treaties are nation-to-nation agreements among sovereign
entities — political groups with the ability to set rules for
their own communities, determine their own membership,
care for their own territory, and enter agreements with other
sovereign entities. Dakota and Anishinaabe are inherently
sovereign as Indigenous people of this land; sovereignty isn’t
given, nor can it be taken away. As sovereign governments,
tribal nations have a unique relationship with the State of
Minnesota and each tribal nation in Minnesota has their
own individual priorities, practices, and histories. The State
recognizes and respects the need to consult and coordinate
with each individual tribal nation on climate actions.

22

Honoring our responsibility
Tribal nations and their communities cannot remove
themselves from their homeland and move to another
location due to impacts from climate change. Most of the
land in what is now Minnesota was ceded by the Anishinaabe
and Dakota people to the United States through treaties
that allowed the United States to remove Indigenous people
from their original homelands and move them to smaller land
bases. These land bases are federally and state recognized
to this day, but the connection that Anishinaabe and Dakota
people have to their original homelands remains. As part of
these treaties, the Anishinaabe and Dakota people reserved
rights to hunt, fish, and harvest from ceded lands and waters.
The ability to exercise those treaty rights depends on clean
water, air, and healthy ecosystems. The State of Minnesota
must uphold treaty responsibilities in all State decisions,
public processes, and policies by protecting the land, native
foods, and the cultural heritage of Indigenous Minnesotans,
including from the ravages of climate change.
Indigenous knowledge about the interconnectedness of
place, subsistence lifeways, and the natural world has been
passed on for generations. In Anishinaabe and Daķota
knowledge systems, the earth is sacred and all living beings —
plants, animals, land, and water — are relatives and ancestors.
Actions and decisions made by tribal nations are based on
this holistic knowledge and also consider potential impacts
to the next seven generations. The interconnectedness
that tribal nations have with everything that surrounds
them and the related teachings passed down from
generation to generation, can be found in the principles of
science, sustainability, resiliency, resource protection, and
environmental health. The state respects and acknowledges
these principles from Indigenous knowledge and will work

with tribal nations on how to apply this knowledge to address
climate change.

Consultation and collaboration
State policies have impacts on tribal nations and their
members living within and outside of reservation and
community boundaries. The State of Minnesota is committed
to working with tribal governments both though formal
consultation between government leaders and informal
coordination and collaboration. Consultation is required by
Minnesota Statutes 10.65, Government-to-Government
Relationship with tribal governments, and informal
coordination between tribal and state government staff is
founded on those same principles.
Climate change policies have the potential to impact
tribal nations, and timely and meaningful consultation at
the beginning of policy or program development, along
with ongoing collaboration, establishes mutually beneficial
outcomes. State and tribal governments both develop, review,
and implement their own policies, programs, rules, and laws
related to climate change with their jurisdiction. Consultation
helps improve interactions across these interconnected
regulatory structures.

Supporting tribal priorities
Each tribal nation has its own climate, environmental, health,
and economic priorities. Often these priorities may be
shared with the state government and are an opportunity
to collaborate. In addition, as the State prioritizes its climate
actions, it can elevate those that align with the priorities of
tribal nations.

23

Tribal governments also often pursue environmental, energy,
housing, and other policy priorities that reduce emissions and
build resiliency, even when climate change may not be the
primary purpose of the policy. Some tribal environmental,
energy, housing, or other policy priorities may not be pursued
explicitly to address climate change, but contribute to reducing
emissions and building resiliency. Supporting tribal-led efforts
across all sectors including energy, waste management, air
quality, forestry, wildlife, carbon sequestration, fisheries, and
others contributes to mitigating impacts of climate change and
benefits all residents of Minnesota.

opportunity, it will work to ensure tribal governments are
eligible to apply, and that the requirements for reporting,
matching funds, and eligibility consider Tribal needs and
constraints.

Through coordination meetings with tribal environmental
staff, review of tribal climate assessments and plans, and
formal tribal comments on the framework and other of
State actions, the State recognizesseveral priorities of many
tribal nations where there are particular opportunities for
collaboration:

Memorandums of agreement are an important
tool to formalize collaboration between state and
tribal governments that recognize and respect tribal
sovereignty.

Water quality is a shared priority of all tribal nations. Water
supports and connects all life, including culturally significant
wild rice, aquatic species, and others that support subsistence
lifeways.
Ensuring affordable housing and renewable energy access
for all tribal communities and members.
Protecting and restoring native ecosystems and important
habitats and species where they are threatened, degraded, or
have been lost due to climate change.

Collaborative data gathering, analyzing, and sharing can
improve outcomes for both state and tribal governments.
The state also recognizes the importance of tribal data
sovereignty, protection, and respectful data collection
processes which will be determined in consultation with
each respective tribal nation.

The state recognizes the value of the time and energy
that tribal nations and their respective tribal staff spend
working on climate change strategies. The state will
continue to share information with tribal nations early
and often regarding climate actions and will continue to
strive for just and equitable outcomes while recognizing
and respecting tribes’ sovereign status. Climate change
directly impacts tribal nations and communities, their
members, and their lifeways. As the State of Minnesota
works toward solutions to limit the impacts of climate
change, these solutions must include the knowledge and
voices of tribal nations.

Funding is necessary for both the state and tribes to minimize
the impacts of climate change. The state and tribes have
the opportunity to collaborate and support each other in
pursuit of funding. In addition, when the state creates a grant

24

Clean transportation

GOAL

1

MN CLIMATE
ACTION
FRAMEWORK

Connect and serve all people through a safe,
equitable, and sustainable transportation system

SHORT
FORM

Priority
actions

The challenges Transportation is the number one
source of greenhouse gases in Minnesota. Land use
patterns and unsafe, inconvenient, and unaffordable
alternatives to driving alone make car travel the first
choice for many. Most cars are powered by fossil
fuels and produce health-harming air pollution with
disproportionate effects on communities close to
traffic corridors. Climate change impacts are also
damaging transportation infrastructure.

Increase funding for nonmotorized transportation.
Direct resources towards
a statewide pedestrian and
bicycle network.

The vision Minnesota’s transportation system is
sustainable, resilient to a changing climate, and
supports equitable transportation options for all
Minnesotans. Air pollution is reduced, especially in
communities most affected by it. Walking, biking,
rolling, and transit options are accessible, safe, and
plentiful.

Increase transit services.
Create more reliable and
convenient transit networks,
prioritize services in
communities where transit
is essential and residents are
disproportionately affected
by air pollution.

Plan land use and
transportation together.
Prioritize land use that
facilitates multimodal
transportation options.

25

CLEAN TRANSPORTATION

Priority
actions

Measures
of
progress

GOAL 1

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Continue exploring
opportunities for a clean
fuels standard. Incentivize
investment and create
markets for cleaner fuels,
such as advanced biofuels,
renewable natural gas,
sustainable aviation fuels, and
electricity.

Reduce GHG
emissions from the
transportation sector
80% by 2040.

Expand regional charging.
Coordinate with neighboring
states, tribes, and other
partners to establish a
Midwest regional EV charging
network.

Decrease vehicle
miles traveled 20%
per capita by 2050.*

Develop a Minnesota EV plan.
Create a strategy to increase
EV-charging infrastructure
and EV access and availability.
Educate communities about
the benefits of EVs.

Reach 20% EVs on
Minnesota roads by
2030.

*This target was proposed as part of
the Statewide Multimodal Transportation Plan and will be finalized
after public input on that plan.

26

CLEAN TRANSPORTATION

GOAL 1

CONTEXT

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Transportation sector 2018

The largest sector

by source of GHGs

The transportation sector is
the largest source of GHGs in
Minnesota, accounting for about
a quarter of total emissions. GHG
emissions from transportation have
decreased by about seven percent
since 2005, but have leveled off
since 2016.
Within transportation, more
100% of MN
than 70% of emissions come
transportation
from passenger vehicles. More GHG
emissions
stringent tailpipe emissions
standards helped lower
vehicle GHG emissions, but
consumers increasingly own larger
vehicles and drive them more miles,
hampering emission-reduction
efforts.

Light-duty trucks 38%

Passenger cars 20%

Heavy-duty trucks 16%

Multimodal transportation options
Supporting different modes of transportation,
like walking, biking, and transit, as well as
access to high-quality broadband can reduce
emissions. Increased access to diverse types
of transportation facilities and networks
supports those who rely on driving alternatives
due to disability, age, economics, or personal
preference. We can add new and complete
existing walking, biking, and transit networks in
our state.
Electric vehicles
Replacing vehicles with electric versions will
reduce carbon pollution. EV sales will increase as
more manufacturers transition to producing only
EVs. Minnesota has more than 1,300 EV chargers,
but more are needed for a fast and reliable
charging network that supports EV users in all
parts of the state. We
must also explore ways
to power EVs with clean
energy and recycle EV
batteries, to further
reduce their impact on
the environment.

Aviation 10%
Natural gas transmission 5%
Marine & railroad 4%
Off-highway 4%
Air conditioning 3%
Other on-road 1.3%
(bus, motorcycle, RV)

Minnesota is building out a
network of EV fast chargers
along highway corridors.

27

CLEAN TRANSPORTATION

GOAL 1

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

WHAT WE WILL DO TOGETHER
Make a cleaner, low-carbon transportation future
Minnesota’s future transportation system will be safer, cleaner, and more comfortable, affordable,
and convenient for all users, whether they drive, bike, walk, roll, or meet their needs virtually
without transportation.

Initiative 1.1

Connected communities
Maintain and improve multimodal transportation connections to reduce emissions and
congestion.
Create more opportunities for biking, walking, transit, and telecommuting
Improving infrastructure for biking, walking, transit, and telecommuting will make these options
more reliable, safe, convenient, and affordable. For example, building bike lanes with increased
separation from vehicles make them safer and more comfortable for riders of all skill levels.
Expanding high-speed internet coverage can enable telecommuting and less driving. Safe walking
environments and expanded transit networks with increased service will benefit everyone. To
successfully encourage multimodal transportation, we must understand Minnesotans’ needs and
preferences, provide education, and demonstrate success.
 lan land use that supports multimodal transportation
P
Climate-smart land use can make both communities and transportation safe, pleasant,
convenient, and affordable to bikers, pedestrians, and transit riders.
Maximize resiliency and GHG mitigation in infrastructure projects
Choosing the right materials, equipment, and work practices can minimize the carbon footprint
of transportation construction projects. Coordinating other improvements, such as broadband
expansion and stormwater management, with those projects provides added benefits.

28

CLEAN TRANSPORTATION

Initiative 1.2

GOAL 1

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Clean and efficient vehicles
Accelerate the transition to electric vehicles, alternative fuels, and greater fuel efficiency.
Increase the use of clean fuels, including lower-carbon biofuels
Cleaner fuels such as electricity, hydrogen, and advanced biofuels, can reduce GHGs and other
emissions from vehicles. Hydrogen and advanced biofuels may be particularly helpful in reducing
emissions from heavy-duty vehicles and other hard to electrify modes, such as air travel. Both
electricity and biofuels can get cleaner with investments in renewable energy and advanced
industrial technology.
 xpand EV charging infrastructure
E
To enable all Minnesotans to drive electric, we need to expand the network of EV charging
stations across the state using public and private investments.
I ncrease EV availability and access
EVs must be widely available and affordable to encourage consumers to make the switch.
Providing incentives and supporting dealerships in supplying a wide variety of EVs will encourage
EV adoption.
 ccelerate the transition to EVs and clean transportation
A
Opportunities for EV ownership, EV-related jobs, and clean transportation investment are
expanding. Supporting the transition will require educating consumers about EVs in partnership
with auto dealers, especially in underserved communities, training the clean transportation
workforce, and attracting transportation investment.
I mprove vehicle efficiency and emissions standards
State and federal rules can require improved vehicle efficiency and reduced emissions from new
vehicles. GHG emissions go down over time as older vehicles are replaced with new, cleaner ones.
Programs can encourage more rapid replacement of older vehicles.

29

CLEAN TRANSPORTATION

GOAL 1

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

We all have a role
Transportation touches all Minnesotans and all
parts of our economy. We all have a role to play in
achieving a cleaner transportation system.
• Federal, state, tribal, and local governments must
work together to plan, fund, and build a resilient transportation
system that prioritizes safe, affordable, and clean multimodal
transportation options.
• Governments, businesses, and non-profits must invest in
expanding the infrastructure needed to support active
transportation, low-carbon fuels and electric vehicles.
• Organizations can use education and incentives to encourage
employees and visitors to choose cleaner transportation
options.
• Individuals can walk, roll, bike, take transit, telecommute,
consolidate short trips, rideshare, and prioritize electric options.
Individuals can also call on government bodies to implement
infrastructure improvements.

Benefits of shared action
Connected communities, low-carbon
fuels, and clean vehicles support many
additional benefits:
• Jobs in clean fuel infrastructure and clean
transportation manufacturing
• Healthier communities from more active
transportation and reduced pollution
• Safer communities with fewer traffic crashes
• More accessible transportation that supports
people of all physical abilities
• Cleaner air and water
• Economic growth in rural communities

Big impacts
Which actions
will achieve the
largest GHG
reductions?

• Transitioning to cleaner fuels, including electricity and biofuels, through incentives and policies
such as a low carbon fuel standard
• Increasing EV adoption by making EVs more affordable, requiring and incentivizing
manufacturers to sell EVs in Minnesota, and expanding charging infrastructure
• Increasing efficiency of vehicles fueled by traditional fuels, such as gasoline and diesel, so they
pollute less

30

CLEAN TRANSPORTATION

GOAL 1

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

EQUITY
Transportation is critical for Minnesotans to access jobs, education, healthcare, recreation, family,
and more. An equitable transportation system would fairly and justly distribute the benefits and
burdens of transportation spending and services, and ensure that all Minnesotans can travel safely,
conveniently, and affordably. Understanding how transportation services and decision-making help
or hinder people in underserved communities is necessary to create equitable clean transportation
strategies.
Rural areas have fewer reliable, safe, and practical options for transportation, such as public
transit and non-motorized transport. More older adults and those with lower incomes live in
rural areas, and they need reliable and affordable transportation options. Investments in cleaner
fuels, EV infrastructure, and alternative modes of transportation, where feasible, can help rural
communities thrive and transition away from internal combustion engines. Supporting cleaner-fuel
development can ignite new businesses in rural areas and create new jobs.
Historically and today, low-income communities and communities of color disproportionately
bear the burdens of our transportation system without having fair and just access to its benefits. In
Minnesota, Black, Indigenous, people of color, and lower-income individuals are exposed to higher
levels of air pollution as a result of an ongoing history of structural racism. Inequitable policies
such as racial covenants, redlining, the destruction and division of Black neighborhoods to build
Interstates 94 and 35W, and zoning and permitting decisions that concentrate pollution sources
in marginalized communities continue to cause harm. As a result, the health of residents in these
communities is at risk from traffic pollution, noise, and physical hazards, such as crashes.
As Minnesota plans for climate action, we must address these inequities and redress past harms by
prioritizing investments in infrastructure and improved transportation options for populations that
have historically been underserved or harmed by our transportation system.

31

Climate-smart natural
and working lands

GOAL

2

MN CLIMATE
ACTION
FRAMEWORK

Enhance climate benefits by absorbing and storing carbon,
reducing emissions, and sustaining resilient landscapes

SHORT
FORM

Priority
actions

The challenges Long-term trends in climate and
weather patterns, such as increasing temperatures
and more extreme rain events, present formidable
challenges to management of natural and working
lands. Certain activities on our working lands, as
well as conversion of our native landscapes to more
intensive uses are also significant sources of GHGs.

Accelerate forest, grassland
and wetland restoration
to store more carbon in
our landscapes, and avoid
conversion to other land uses
that reduce carbon storage.

The vision Healthy natural and working lands
absorb and store more carbon, produce food and
other products, sustain local economies, enhance
climate resiliency, and improve the quality of life for
Minnesotans.

Store more carbon. Promote
actions that store more
carbon on croplands, in yards
and open spaces, and on
public lands.

Restore and expand habitat
complexes and corridors.
Increase species diversity to
promote climate resiliency
and adaptation of natural
landscapes.

32

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

Priority
actions

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Expand climate-resilient
agriculture and forestry.
Incentivize beneficial practices
and assist in implementation,
including increased access to
technologies, equipment, and
seed and plant material.

Manage agricultural lands
in a way that reduces GHG
emissions, particularly potent
gases such as methane and
nitrous oxide.

Measures
of
progress

By 2035, increase by
25% the amount of
carbon sequestered
and stored annually in
natural and working
lands, compared to
2014-2018 average
levels.

Increase water storage and
infiltration, and manage
drainage. Reduce runoff and
minimize downstream flooding,
erosion, and habitat loss.

Invest in new markets
and supply chains for
crops and that keep soil
covered year-round, and
for wood products that
increase carbon storage and
substitute for more fossil
fuel-intensive materials.

Prioritize groundwater and
drinking water protection in
vulnerable areas.
Promote local and
community-based agriculture
to reduce transportation
needs and increase food
access, especially in
underserved communities.

By 2035, reduce
annual GHG emissions in the working lands sector
by 25% from 2018
levels.

By 2030, all statefunded or sponsored
land, water, and
species management
plans identify
actions to increase
adaptation.

33

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

CONTEXT
Storing carbon and reducing emissions

Minnesota’s varied landscapes — croplands, pastures, forests, woodlands, prairies,
wetlands, and our more than 10,000 lakes — are part of our identity. They are also an
essential part of our climate solution. An acre of grassland can hold as much as 78 tons
of carbon while an acre of mature evergreen forest can hold up to 140 tons. Harvested
forest products store carbon — sometimes for long periods of time — and can replace
fossil-fuel-intensive products. We also have opportunities to reduce GHG emissions
on agricultural lands from fertilizer, livestock, and energy use, while storing carbon in
healthy soils.

Economically viable solutions

The expense of changing land management practices and adopting new technologies
can be prohibitive, particularly for family-owned farms. We must identify innovations
that benefit the climate and avoid undue financial risks for landowners. We must also
choose the best solutions for all types of landscapes, based on site conditions, climate
vulnerability, market conditions (for timber and agricultural lands), and government
policies and practices.

Additional research

Our understanding of how land use practices affect climate change is rapidly evolving,
though we have a solid basis for immediate actions. We need further research to
explain how GHGs flow into and
out of landscapes, and to identify
effective ways to make natural
and working lands more resilient
to climate change. Filling these
gaps in our knowledge will help
support strategic decision-making,
investments, policy development,
and goal setting.

Land and water
stewardship
The actions we take to reduce GHG
emissions and sequester carbon on
natural and working lands — such as
soil health initiatives, water retention
projects, and certain forestry
practices — also enhance our ongoing
land and water protection efforts.
The added benefits include improving
habitat for wildlife, pollinators, and
endangered species; protecting food
production; and safeguarding water
quality.
Many landscapes are both “working”
and “natural.” Natural lands may
provide critical fishing, hunting,
and gathering resources, especially
for tribal nations and Indigenous
communities. Agricultural and other
developed landscapes, including
yards, can support native plant and
animal species. Integrating tribal
perspectives, traditional ecological
knowledge, and culturally important
species and foodways into our efforts
to address climate change will ensure
that we consider both the needs of
people and the needs of landscapes
and ecosystems.

34

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

WHAT WE WILL DO TOGETHER
Innovative approaches to create a more resilient landscape
Minnesota’s agricultural and natural lands will increasingly absorb and store more carbon while
producing food and other products, sustaining local economies, and improving quality of life
around the state.

Initiative 2.1

Carbon sequestration and storage in forested lands, grasslands,
and wetlands
Manage forests, grasslands, and wetlands for increased carbon sequestration and storage.
 aintain, expand, and actively manage forestlands
M
Active forest management promotes carbon uptake, adapts forests to current and future climate
stressors such as pests and diseases, and reduces emissions from wildfires. Maintaining existing
forests and expanding forest cover where appropriate strengthens the carbon sink.
Protect, restore, and manage peatlands and other wetlands
Peatlands (bogs and fens) hold some of Minnesota’s largest carbon reserves, but emit large
quantities of carbon when ditched and drained. Protecting existing peatlands and other wetlands,
and restoring drained, farmed or pastured peatlands and wetlands will increase carbon storage.
 rotect, restore, and manage grasslands
P
Grasslands with high native plant diversity are more beneficial for wildlife and pollinators, and
store more carbon, than low-diversity grasslands. Grasslands are important to ecosystems and to
livestock production.
Encourage individual actions that increase carbon storage
Most landowners and managers can take steps to store more carbon and boost climate resilience,
with pollinator plantings, neighborhood gardens, community boulevard trees, woodland
stewardship projects, and more. The improvements can be accomplished almost anywhere, from
residential and commercial landscaping to small woodlots or city parks.

35

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

Initiative 2.2

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Resilient landscapes and ecosystems
Enhance the ability of plants and animals, including crops, to adapt to the effects
of climate change.
 onserve and enhance biodiversity
C
Landscapes with high native plant diversity provide the best wildlife and pollinator habitat, the
most resistance to invasive species, and the greatest adaptability to climate change.
Use land management practices that enhance climate resilience
Certain timber harvest, soil health, grazing, and other land management practices can enhance
climate resiliency, create wildlife habitats, and contribute to the economy. Strategic habitat
restoration helps connect plant and wildlife populations.
 romote the benefits of natural lands in climate adaptation
P
Natural landscapes that effectively store and filter water, reduce erosion, and support habitats
also provide economic and cultural benefits to the state, including livestock, timber, recreation,
and tourism.

Initiative 2.3

Healthy farmland
Accelerate soil health and nitrogen and manure management practices that reduce emissions and
enhance carbon storage, water quality, and habitat.
Increase organic carbon content and reduce erosion
Practices such as cover crops, conservation tillage, diverse crop rotations, buffers, shelterbelts,
and hedgerows can help to store carbon in soils, reduce use of nitrogen fertilizers, and improve
resilience to precipitation fluctuations. Emerging practices such as the use of green fertilizers and
biochar on cropland and pastureland are promising options.
Manage fertilizer and manure to reduce emissions
The nitrous oxide produced from nitrogen fertilizer and manure is about 300 times more
powerful as a GHG than carbon dioxide. The methane in manure is about 30 times more
powerful. Precision agriculture, plant selection, and breeding, soil amendment technologies,
nitrification inhibitors, split nitrogen fertilizer applications, and similar nutrient management
practices can reduce nitrous oxide emissions. Advanced technologies for manure management,

36

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

such as acidification and anaerobic digestion, can reduce methane emissions. Proper nutrient
management also provides agronomic benefits and improves profitably.
Manage land for multiple benefits
Helping farmers combine climate-resilient best management practices through programs such
as the Minnesota Agricultural Water Quality Certification Program and various state and USDA
conservation programs can improve profitability while decreasing emissions and improving soil
health, water quality, and wildlife habitat.

Initiative 2.4

Sustainable landscapes and water management
Reduce GHGs and improve landscape resiliency through multi-purpose water storage and
management practices that protect farmland, water supplies and infrastructure.
Manage agricultural landscapes to hold nitrogen and retain rainfall and snow melt
Planting native vegetation, cover crops, and perennial crops in source water protection areas can
promote infiltration, store more carbon, reduce nitrous oxide emissions, and protect drinking
water supplies.
Manage agricultural landscapes to hold water and reduce runoff
Climate change is making Minnesota’s climate wetter, with more frequent and higher-intensity
storms. Water storage and treatment in targeted areas can reduce downstream flooding and
erosion. Practices such as wetland and floodplain restoration, drainage water management, and
buffer establishment can build resiliency by reducing flow rates and velocities, improving stream
stability, and enhancing wildlife habitat.

37

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

Initiative 2.5

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Investments in emerging crops, products, and local economies
Support emerging agricultural and forest technologies and products that reduce waste, create
jobs, and expand economic opportunities.
Invest in climate-smart agriculture and develop markets for climate-benefitting products
Supporting end markets for cover crops and perennial crops that keep soil covered in spring and
fall, increase carbon storage, and decrease use of nitrogen fertilizer can encourage farmers to
plant them and boost local economies. Minnesota can be a leader in developing technologies and
products for climate-smart agriculture, such as plant and soil amendments that decrease nitrous
oxide while increasing nitrogen use efficiency; manure management practices that decrease
methane emissions; and fuel, fertilizer, and fiber products that capture, repurpose, or sequester
carbon.
Promote forest products that store carbon and reduce GHG emissions
Long-lived wood products, such as building materials, store carbon for the life of the product.
Many emerging forests products — engineered wood, biochemicals, biofuels, and environmental
remediation products — are low-carbon substitutes for fossil-fuel-intensive products. Extracting
energy from waste wood and wood residuals can diversify forest-product markets and reduce the
need for energy from other sources.
Support local food markets, urban agriculture, and emerging farmers
Food produced and consumed locally can reduce emissions from transportation of goods. It
can also support local farmers and entrepreneurs, promote economic vitality, and provide
underserved communities with access to healthy, fresh food, and economic opportunities.
Reduce waste and promote beneficial use of materials
Increasing composting as an agricultural practice will enhance soil health. Supporting local and
regional composting programs, zero waste challenges, and beneficial uses of waste wood will
contribute to emission reductions.

38

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Big impacts
Which actions
will achieve the
largest GHG
reductions?

• Applying agricultural
practices to reduce emissions
and sequester carbon.

• Protecting, restoring, and
managing grasslands and
wetlands to sequester more
carbon.

We all have a role
How our parks, yards, agricultural lands, forests,
wetlands, and grasslands are managed affects our
climate and our quality of life. We all have a role to play
in managing, protecting, and restoring our natural and
working lands.
• Businesses, educational institutions, and governments must
fund research to find and develop climate-smart land practices,
educate landowners on their use and benefits, and support
workforce training and development in these areas.
• Governments and organizations can protect key natural lands
and implement best practices such as green infrastructure on
developed lands.
• Individuals can purchase locally produced food and consumer
goods, reduce food waste, and plant and tend trees and native
plants.

• Increasing carbon
sequestration and storage in
forests and harvested wood
products.

Benefits of shared action
Climate-smart natural and working land
management supports a broad array of
additional benefits, including:
• Reduced surface and groundwater pollution, which
helps protect drinking water and keeps lakes and
rivers swimmable and fishable
• Stronger agricultural, forest, recreation, and
tourism economies, especially in rural communities
• A more resilient food supply that supports healthy
lives, especially in underserved communities
• Healthy native plant and animal communities
• Natural lands that serve our cultural, recreational,
health, and spiritual needs

39

CLIMATE-SMART NATURAL AND WORKING LANDS

GOAL 2

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

EQUITY
Opportunities to benefit from Minnesota’s natural and working lands are not
equitably distributed. Structural injustices have historically influenced land access,
ownership, management, and protection. Tribal nations have lost treaty-protected
resources and rights due to inequitable policies such as the 1889 Nelson Act.
Underserved racial and ethnic populations have also been disproportionately
affected by limited access to nature, exposure to pollution, lack of shared decisionmaking, and inequitable land ownership and land use laws and practices. Agricultural
opportunity has not been equally accessible to all Minnesotans due in part to laws
and programs, such as the 1862 Homestead Act, which distributed essentially free
land to mostly white Americans and immigrants, and 20th-century U.S. Department
of Agriculture grant and loan programs, which had documented racial bias in their
distribution. Challenges continue today, including access to capital, government
programs, and land.
While acting to address climate change, we must also address these inequities by:
• Removing barriers
to participation
in sustainable
farming and timber
production, such
as lack of access to
capital and land.

• Developing
career paths and
employment
programs for urban
populations who are
underrepresented
in agriculture,
forestry, and natural
resource conservation
professions.

• Increasing access
to healthy food,
especially in
underserved
communities, to
improve community
health, reduce
emissions, and support
local economies.

• Ensuring all
Minnesotans have
access to, and feel
welcome in, natural
lands and open spaces,
especially publicly
owned lands.

• Preserving and
protecting traditional
cultural resources and
outdoor spaces.

40

Resilient communities

GOAL

3

MN CLIMATE
ACTION
FRAMEWORK

Provide each Minnesota community with tools to plan
for and become resilient to its unique climate impacts

SHORT
FORM

Priority
actions

The challenges Communities experience a variety
of climate-change effects, including wastewater
releases, stormwater flooding, shoreline erosion,
drought, and more. Solutions must be tailored to
each community’s needs.

Provide more resources for
adaptation. Expand funding,
staff capacity, technical
support, and training for
planning and implementation
of adaptation and resiliency
projects.

The vision Communities across Minnesota have the
resources and support to plan for and implement
projects to build a more resilient future for
themselves. Physical infrastructure, natural systems,
and communities are more prepared for climate
impacts and can recover from extreme events.

Increase capacity of the
GreenStep Cities program.
Share resilience best
practices and adaptation
resources and expand pilot
programs that include tribal
nations, schools, counties,
and townships.

Plant climate-ready trees
and preserve mature
trees. Climate-ready tree
species are well-adapted
to challenges such as heat,
drought, extreme weather,
and pests. Along with mature
trees, they decrease energy
use in homes and buildings
and mitigate heat islands.
They should be used to
replace diseased trees.

41

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES

GOAL 3

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Priority actions
Expand green infrastructure and stormwater management
control flooding, restore
lost habitat, and improve
water quality.

Measures
of
progress

Adopt resilient
building policies.
Adopt provisions in
construction and
remodeling codes that
prioritize adaptive reuse,
and create resilient
design standards.

By 2030, 100% of
Minnesotans live in
communities with
plans that identify
climate risks and
actions to build
resiliency.

Assess vulnerabilities
at critical facilities. Use
climate projections to
predict future hazards
and make plans to ensure
continuity of operation.

By 2026, at least
25 adaptation
projects that
increase
community
resiliency are fully
funded.

Combat heat islands.
Provide funding and
technical assistance
to help communities
reduce their urban heat
island effect.

Achieve 30% overall
tree canopy cover in
Minnesota communities by 2030 and
40% by 2050.

42

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES

GOAL 3

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

CONTEXT

Urban heat
In urban space, hard surfaces and buildings
absorb and radiate heat, which can increase
temperatures significantly. This is called the
heat island effect. Green infrastructure,
including growing and maintaining trees and
making smart land use decisions, can help offset
and lower temperatures and reduce the heat
island effect.
Land surface
Land Surface Temperature,
Twin Cities Metro Area
temperature
Twin Cities Metro
Temperature in Degrees
Fahrenheit

July 22, 2016 at 12:00 PM CDT

ANOKA

High : 125.21

Extreme weather effects
Communities must manage the
cleanup and repair of the flood
damage, infrastructure failure,
downed trees, and other destruction
that comes with increasingly
frequent and intense storms.
Climate adaptation strategies can
be implemented at the individual
and community levels. Collective
adaptation action protects and
sustains local assets and services that
are fundamental to a community’s
prosperity.

Aging infrastructure
Many communities have aging and
inadequate water infrastructure
(stormwater systems, sewers,
septic systems, and wastewater
treatment plants) that can’t handle
this extreme precipitation. The
result is flooded streets, sewage
backing up into homes and
businesses, wastewater treatment
system overflows, and millions of
dollars in damages to public and
private property. Development of
resilient design standards can help
communities build and upgrade
infrastructure to better handle
current and future climate impacts.

July 22, 2016, 12 p.m.

Low : 74.17

High: 125F

WASHINGTON

Low: 74F
RAMSEY

HENNEPIN

CARVER

SCOTT

0

5

10

DAKOTA

15

20

1/5/2018

Miles

County Boundaries
City and Township Boundaries
Lakes and Major Rivers

Support for communities
National Wetlands Inventory

Cities, towns, and residents need support to
assess vulnerabilities and identify, plan, and
implement climate resiliency projects. We
must provide data, resources, and technical
assistance.

43

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES

GOAL 3

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

WHAT WE WILL DO TOGETHER
Minnesota communities will be prepared for the effects of climate change
Local planners will have the data, tools, and technical expertise they need to implement
community-specific adaptation actions and increase resilience, including equity-based solutions.

Initiative 3.1

Climate-smart communities
Build the capacity of Minnesota communities to protect against and withstand the effects of
climate change.
 rovide needed technical assistance, tools, maps, and data
P
Communities need resources and support for asset management, risk assessment, adaptation,
and resilient metrics and performance measurements. Adaptation technical assistance and tools
provide communities with access to expertise, enable them to evaluate and implement strategies,
and expand their capacity to pursue funding. Maps show flood-prone areas, key infrastructure,
community assets like hospitals and parks, and areas most vulnerable to climate change. High
quality climate-projection data, along with data on past and current temperature, humidity,
precipitation, air quality, and drought, also help communities with resilience planning.
 eliver necessary funding
D
Federal, state, and local funds will be invested in building community resilience, and
supplemented by private funding sources.
Share best practices through learning networks
Create community connections to circulate successful adaptation strategies and project results.
Build community capacity through GreenStep Cities, Minnesota GreenCorps, and the University
of Minnesota Climate Adaptation Partnership. Expand pilot programs with tribal nations, schools,
counties, and townships.

44

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES

Initiative 3.2

GOAL 3

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Healthy community green spaces and water resources
Expand and protect tree canopies; parks and other green spaces; and lakes, rivers, and wetlands
that provide community resilience benefits.
 xpand tree planting and preservation
E
Planting and preserving shade trees in urban areas is a remedy for heat island effects that helps
decrease energy use in homes and buildings. Increasing tree canopy — and engaging residents
in planning and decision-making — is especially important in low-income and marginalized
communities. Planting climate-ready trees and managing tree stressors, such as emerald ash
borer, are important parts of the overall strategy.
 lant beneficial vegetation on urban land
P
Parks, community gardens, yards, and other public and private green spaces have underused
potential for lowering temperatures, providing habitat, and managing stormwater. Growing native
and climate-adapted species in these areas can also support pollinators, protect biodiversity, and
boost ecosystem resiliency and the food web.
 rotect and improve water quality and quantity
P
Minnesota’s groundwater and our many lakes, rivers, and wetlands support ecosystems, provide
drinking water, offer recreation, sustain industries and food producers, and bear important
cultural and spiritual significance for us. We must take action to counteract the precipitation and
temperature changes and other climate change effects that threaten water quality and quantity.

Initiative 3.3

Resilient buildings, infrastructure, and business
Help the built environment and local economies become more resilient to climate change.
 lan for climate adaptation in residential and commercial development
P
Buildings must be able to withstand the extreme precipitation, flooding, extended heat waves,
urban heat islands, and grid failures caused by climate change. Building codes, permits, and
policies for land use, new construction, and rehabilitation should encourage or require adaptive
planning. New research, innovation, and design standards are needed to ensure buildings are
climate resilient.

45

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES

GOAL 3

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

 und resilient infrastructure and critical facilities
F
We must support the building and maintenance of climate-ready water and wastewater treatment
facilities, hospitals, energy infrastructure, roadways, and other critical facilities and infrastructure,
to ensure they are accessible and continue to operate during and after extreme weather.
 xpand green infrastructure and stormwater management
E
Using plants, soils, and permeable surfaces to reduce runoff and divert it from storm drains can
help restore lost habitat, control flooding and manage intense rain events, improve water quality
and watershed health, protect infrastructure, and provide other benefits to vulnerable people.
 educe the urban heat island effects
R
Cities and towns of all sizes need funding and technical assistance to reduce urban heat island
effects. Replacing or limiting hard surfaces, adding green infrastructure, and preserving mature
trees will significantly lower temperatures and reduce the impacts of excessive heat. Investments
should be prioritized to address local vulnerabilities, equity, and impact.
Support adaptation for local businesses
Providing better access to capital and technical expertise will help small businesses plan for
effects such as unseasonable conditions, flooding, or supply chain disruptions due to extreme
weather. Some industries, such as construction and remodeling, may see opportunities in building
climate-resiliency knowledge and skills and supporting community adaptation efforts.

46

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES

GOAL 3

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

We all have a role
Building resiliency will require
localized planning, and action
and expertise from federal, state,
tribal, and local governments,
researchers, businesses, and
community members.
• Federal, state, tribal, and local governments
need to collaborate to develop, share, and
use the data necessary for analyzing and
planning for climate impacts.
• Educational institutions and organizations
can provide training and technical expertise
to help communities understand their
vulnerabilities to climate change and
implement strategies to build resilience.

Benefits of shared action
Action to build resilience and adapt to climate change can
also support:
• Resilient ecosystems that provide habitat, protect water quality,
promote the inherent value of wildlife and plants and their right to
exist, and support tribal hunting and gathering.
• Jobs in emergency preparedness, community resource and asset
management, and planning and implementing resilience projects,
particularly for stormwater and wastewater systems.
• Parks, natural areas, and community forests that nurture community
well-being and require less energy to maintain.
• Well-designed buildings, critical facilities, and infrastructure that
require less ongoing funding and repair.
• Residents feeling safe and healthy in their communities.

47

EQUITY
Communities of color and lower income communities are often least able to invest in
adaptive strategies. Historical policies of housing segregation, such as redlining and
mortgage discrimination, have caused housing insecurity in these communities, which
are often located on land vulnerable to flooding, erosion, and other climate change
impacts. Minnesotans with fewer financial resources and renters are less able to make
home upgrades, maintain their indoor air quality, and safely and affordably heat and
cool their homes.
Under-investment in these communities means that they often have fewer trees and
parks and are more vulnerable to urban heat islands. We must prioritize the needs of
climate-vulnerable communities and ensure their meaningful involvement and fair
treatment at all stages of adaptation planning and implementation.
An equitable transition to a more resilient Minnesota will:
• Prioritize engagement
of front-line
communities in work to
assess climate risks and
identify priority actions
to mitigate risks.

• Fund resiliency planning
and infrastructure
improvements in
communities that have
been under invested
in historically through
use of a climate &
equity index and other
resources.

• Prioritize clean-up
strategies and climate
adaptation investments
in neighborhoods
with fewer resources
and that are
disproportionately
affected by unhealthy
water, soil, and air.

48

Clean energy and
efficient buildings

GOAL

4

MN CLIMATE
ACTION
FRAMEWORK

Expand the use of carbon-free electricity and create healthy,
comfortable buildings that are cheaper to operate and pollute less

SHORT
FORM

Priority
actions

The challenges Electrical utilities are producing
less carbon and more renewable energy, yet we still
must address the energy burdens of low-income
households, energy grid inadequacies, and equitable
access to clean energy. Most existing buildings predate the current efficiency standards, and buildings’
GHG emissions are rising. Reducing emissions from
electricity and heating will drive reductions from
buildings.

Establish a standard to achieve 100%
carbon-free electricity and 55%
renewable electricity by 2040.

The vision Minnesotans have reliable, clean, and
lower-cost energy through equitable investments
in energy efficiency, clean energy, and low-carbon
technology. The transition creates more jobs and
more comfortable homes and businesses.

Adapt the grid. Promote electrical grid and
transmission upgrades and research and
development to enable greater reliability and
renewable energy access and integration.

49

CLEAN ENERGY AND EFFICIENT BUILDINGS

Priority
actions

GOAL 4

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Reduce emissions related
to heating and cooling
homes and businesses.
Explore and evaluate new
regulatory and policy options
such as, but not limited to, a
clean thermal standard and
incentive programs. Maximize
emission reductions through
implementation of the Energy
Conservation Optimization
Act and the Natural Gas
Innovation Act.

Measures
of
progress

By 2030,
reduce
thermal GHG
emissions by
at least 20%,
compared to
2005 levels.

Reduce energy use and waste. Support
opportunities for additional incentives,
loans, and policies for existing homes,
businesses, government, and schools
in order to reduce energy use for all
Minnesotans as well as to improve health
through better air quality. Investigate
supply-side supports, or pricing supports,
for energy-efficient appliances, heating
and air conditioning equipment, and
domestic water heaters so that the lowcost-choice is also an energy-efficient
choice.

Improve codes
and standard
for all new
commercial
and large multifamily buildings
to achieve netzero by 2036.

By 2040, all
of Minnesota’s
electricity is
carbon-free.

By 2030,
weatherize
a quarter of
dwellings where
occupants earn
50% or less
of the state
median income.

By 2035, reduce
GHG emissions
from existing
buildings by
50% compared
to 2005 levels.

By 2030, reduce
energy use by
10% and total
waste heat
and waste
electricity by
15%, compared
to 2005 levels.

By 2030,
reduce the
energy burden
so at least 80%
of Minnesotans
spend less than
5% of their
household
income on
energy costs.

By 2030,
reduce
statewide
primary
energy usage
by 10%,
compared to
2005 levels.

50

CLEAN ENERGY AND EFFICIENT BUILDINGS

GOAL 4

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

CONTEXT
Making strides in electricity
generation and distribution

Rising GHG emissions from
buildings

Electricity generation in Minnesota is
getting cleaner as coal plants retire and
renewable energy grows, and we need to
continue the trend. Tribal nations and many
other communities need better access to
energy conservation opportunities and
renewable energy. We must also address
energy-grid reliability, transmission, and
distribution costs and barriers.

Since 2005, GHG emissions from
commercial buildings have risen 15%,
and 32% from residential buildings.
Reversing this trend will require lowcarbon and energy-efficient building
technology, investing in building
electrification, and retrofitting
existing buildings.

Projected electricity generation by source Minnesota, 2020-2034

Utilities are already planning to transition to an energy mix that is over
75% carbon-free by 2034.

51

CLEAN ENERGY AND EFFICIENT BUILDINGS

GOAL 4

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

WHAT WE WILL DO TOGETHER
Transitioning to clean energy and more efficient buildings
Investments in renewable energy, electrification, energy efficiency, lower-emitting technologies
and materials, and building resiliency will help mitigate climate change, create jobs, and improve
our quality of life.

Initiative 4.1

Clean energy
Transition to 100% carbon-free, reliable, and affordable electrical power and heat through
policies, investments, and partnerships.
Transition to 100% carbon-free electricity
By 2040, Minnesota’s electricity generation will add no carbon to the atmosphere. The
transition will lay the groundwork for emission reductions in other sectors as they move towards
electric vehicles and other electric alternatives. We must also ensure the power grid is reliable
and affordable and has adequate capacity, and that all Minnesotans have equitable access to
renewable energy and energy efficiency opportunities.
 tilize waste heat
U
The machines used to produce electricity and the systems that heat and cool buildings generate
by-product “waste heat” that can be captured and utilized. Currently, more than half of this
energy is not captured. Introducing new mechanisms to trap and use the heat can lower costs,
improve efficiency, and reduce GHG emissions.

52

CLEAN ENERGY AND EFFICIENT BUILDINGS

Initiative 4.2

GOAL 4

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Smarter buildings and construction
Reduce GHG emissions in the building sector by promoting conservation, efficiency, and lowercarbon design, materials, and fuels.
Increase efficiency and reduce emissions in existing buildings
Support opportunities for energy-efficient upgrades by providing tools to assess building performance and promoting energy and emissions benchmarking. Target investments in lower-income
communities that are challenged by older buildings and a lack of resources. Train building professionals on energy-efficient and low-carbon equipment and strategies.
 esign and build climate-smart new buildings
D
Ensure new buildings are energy efficient, climate-resilient, and powered by renewable energy.
We must also update building codes and construction standards to mandate net-zero energy
construction; incorporating energy efficiency in new buildings is much less expensive than
retrofitting existing structures.
Building reuse and preventing waste
Incentivize the rehabilitation of existing buildings that include energy, resilience, and efficiency
upgrades. Provide tools to assess buildings’ adaptive reuse potential. Promote the reuse and
recycling of demolition materials.

Big impacts

Electricity generation:

Buildings sector:

Which actions
will achieve the
largest GHG
reductions?

• P
 roducing only carbon-free
electricity in Minnesota by 2040

• U
 pdating building codes to ensure the highest
possible efficiency and lowest possible emissions
in new buildings

• Increasing the renewable energy
standard

• P
 roviding tools and incentives to improve the
efficiency and reduce emissions from existing
buildings

53

CLEAN ENERGY AND EFFICIENT BUILDINGS

GOAL 4

We all have a role
Many partners must contribute
to the efforts to advance energy
efficiency, increase the availability
of renewables, and make buildings
more efficient and resilient.
• Individuals can lower their energy use though
new technologies, behavior changes, and
home upgrades using utility and governmentoffered weatherization programs.
• Government units can provide weatherization
and energy-efficiency education, funding, and
implementation assistance for homeowners and
renters.

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Benefits of shared action
Actions to reduce emissions and improve efficiency in
the power sector and buildings have other benefits:
• Cost savings for businesses and residents from lowered energy
use.
• Improved health from less indoor and outdoor air pollution and
from home-weatherization efforts, and lower medical costs,
along with fewer missed school and work days.
• New jobs in energy efficiency and clean energy industries.

• Businesses, nonprofits, governments, and
utilities can work together to improve energy
efficiency and reduce GHG emissions in their
existing and new buildings.

54

CLEAN ENERGY AND EFFICIENT BUILDINGS

GOAL 4

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

EQUITY
Power generation and building efficiency affect everyone,
but not all Minnesotans are able to access the available
benefits. People with lower incomes pay a larger portion
of their income on energy and housing than those earning
more. Due to decades of housing segregation, redlining,
and other harmful policies, Minnesotans of color are
more likely to rent homes rather than own them, which
limits their access to energy efficiency and renewable
energy opportunities. These communities also suffer
disproportionate rates of utility disconnection, which can
be life-threatening during extreme weather.

An equitable transition to our clean
energy future would include:

Renewable Energy Partners in Minneapolis does solar installation and skill training
in an underserved part of the city.

· Expanding incentives and other
mechanisms for businesses in
overburdened communities to
transition to renewable energy.

• Help lower-income households access
local and affordable renewable energy,
with options such as community and
rooftop solar.

• Invest in energy efficiency programs,
and ensure that communities of color,
tribal nations, and lower-income
communities have access to them.
Eliminate inequities by fuel used or area
of the state.

• Support job training in rural and lowincome communities for work in
energy-efficiency retrofits of current
housing stock.

• Promote community-driven
solutions to affordable housing that
incorporate energy efficiency, address
gentrification, and prevent climaterelated displacement.

55

GOAL

Healthy lives and
communities

5

MN CLIMATE
ACTION
FRAMEWORK

Protect the health and wellbeing of Minnesotans in the
face of climate change

SHORT
FORM

Priority
actions

The challenges Changes in Minnesota’s climate
threaten the health of all our communities, but not
everyone contributes to nor experiences these
impacts equally. Existing inequities based on race,
age, gender, geography, economic status, and more
place some communities at greater risk.

Raise awareness of health
impacts. Build partnerships
to improve education and
raise awareness of the health
impacts of climate change.

The vision Minnesotans are healthy, safe, and
resilient in the face of climate change, especially
those that live in the communities that are most
affected.

Fund and support
community-led initiatives
across Minnesota that address
health risks from climate
change and improve health
outcomes.

Prepare for diseases. Build
the capacity of public health
agencies and communities to
prepare for and respond to
new and current diseases that
are increasing due to climate
change.

56

HEALTHY LIVES AND COMMUNITIES

Priority
actions

GOAL 5

Track, monitor,
and compile a
regular report
on the health
impacts of climate
change in diverse
populations in
Minnesota.

Measures
of
progress

CONTEXT
Our greatest health challenge
Climate change has been called the
greatest health challenge because it
threatens the very basics we depend
upon for life, including safe and
available drinking water, clean air,
and a reliable food supply. Some of
the known direct health impacts of
climate change:

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Adapt outdoor
recreation on
public lands for a
changing climate
and to serve
changing
demographics.

By 2030, reduce
the age-adjusted
rate of heatrelated ER visits to
10 per 100,000.

Assess healthcare
resilience. Ensure
hospitals and
other facilities
can withstand
extreme weather
and other hazards.
Plan and implement
adaptation projects.

By 2025, ensure at
least 40% of the
benefits of certain
state and federal
climate investments
are in disadvantaged
communities.

Provide proactive
health services. Deliver
culturally-appropriate,
affordable, and
responsive healthcare
and mental health
services to protect
public health and
create a foundation for
climate resiliency.

Increase the
diversity of state
agencies’ leadership
to reflect the
state’s changing
demographics.

• More heat-related illnesses due to extreme heat waves
• Injuries and death from extreme precipitation and flooding
• Increasing societal and healthcare costs from more emergency
department visits, hospitalizations, and premature deaths
• Increase in diseases transmitted by animals to humans that may
then spread from humans to humans and diseases transmitted
by ticks and mosquitoes
• Respiratory and cardiovascular impacts from increased wildfire
smoke and pollen
• Mental health impacts from experiencing extreme weather
events, climate-related instability, and other changes

57

HEALTHY LIVES AND COMMUNITIES

GOAL 5

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Impacting things that support our health
Climate change also impacts our health indirectly, by affecting the many things
that create our health, such as safe housing, reliable transportation, nutritious
and affordable foods, and job stability. Indirect impacts can make other health
conditions worse. For example, if increased precipitation creates problems with
mold in a family’s home, this could increase their child’s allergies. Other indirect
health impacts include:
• Disruptions to transportation systems from extreme weather making it more
difficult to access grocery stores, jobs, and medical care.
• Loss of neighborhood tree canopy from invasive pests making extreme heat
worse.
• Loss of income to families when businesses and farms are impacted by
drought or extreme weather.

Health is affected by all parts
of our society
All parts of our economy and society affect
our health, including transportation, jobs,
energy, housing, and agriculture. The rest
of the actions in the framework will support
healthier communities as we address climate
change and build resiliency across Minnesota.
It is also necessary to specifically focus on
supporting community health, public health
infrastructure, healthcare systems, and other
ways climate change impacts our health.

58

HEALTHY LIVES AND COMMUNITIES

GOAL 5

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

WHAT WE WILL DO TOGETHER
Protect health and improve health equity
Minnesota will invest resources and implement policies and strategies that address the health
impacts of climate change on individuals and communities.

Initiative 5.1

Healthy communities
Protect communities from the direct and indirect health effects of climate change.
 upport healthy communities and workplaces
S
Help workplaces protect employees who are vulnerable to climate-related health risks, such as
those working outdoors in extreme heat. Ensure communities have access to safe places during
climate-related disasters. Educate Minnesotans on the health effects of climate change, and help
communities address them.
 rotect culturally important activities
P
Conserve species and habitats that are critical to tribal nations and other communities. Safeguard
outdoor recreation opportunities, such as ice fishing, hunting, ricing, swimming, hiking, biking, and
skiing, that are important to Minnesotans’ health and wellbeing.

Initiative 5.2

Climate-smart public health and healthcare systems
Bolster public health resources and promote strategies to reduce GHGs from healthcare facilities.
Increase public health capacity and adaptation resources
Increase capacity of public health agencies to prepare for and respond to changing and novel
diseases and illnesses related to climate change, collect and develop climate-related data, track
the health impacts of climate change, implement health-protection strategies, and ensure
healthcare and mental health services are available through climate-related disasters.
 upport climate-smart healthcare systems
S
Encourage healthcare facilities and organizations to lower their GHG emissions and reduce waste.

59

HEALTHY LIVES AND COMMUNITIES

GOAL 5

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

We all have a role
Working together with climate-vulnerable communities, businesses,
nonprofits, faith-based organizations, educational agencies and
institutions, public health, healthcare systems, and others, we can build
resiliency while reducing health disparities for those most impacted by
climate change.
• Local governments and organizations can create resiliency hubs to protect people
during extreme weather events.
• Employers can protect workers from extreme weather and offer telecommuting
options that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and support families.
• Public health organizations can track the health impacts of climate change and
partner with communities in implementing health-protective strategies.

Benefits of
shared action
Addressing the health
impacts of climate change through
mitigation and adaptation actions
serves to:
• Protect public health and reduce
health disparities
• Protect the environment and
culturally important places
• Improve community climate
resiliency

• Educational institutions and universities can prepare future generations by raising
awareness of climate change and resiliency strategies and researching the health
effects of climate change.
• Healthcare systems can reduce their carbon footprint and prepare for extreme
weather to ensure delivery of services.

60

HEALTHY LIVES AND COMMUNITIES

GOAL 5

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

EQUITY
Many Minnesota communities have demonstrably poorer health
due to unequal access to health care, biased housing practices
that placed them closer to sources of pollution, and other
factors. These health disparities are made worse by climate
change. For example, American Indian and African American
middle and high school-aged kids are more likely than other
students to have been diagnosed with asthma. Asthma is
exacerbated by poor air quality and wildfire smoke. Historically
racist housing policies (such as redlining) are associated with
urban heat islands and lack of tree canopy in low-income
neighborhoods of color, which suffer more from extreme
heat as a result. Communities that already lack resources
are burdened by the costs of increased healthcare and of
withstanding or recovering from climate-related events.
Climate change amplifies existing health and economic
inequities. Protecting the health of our communities requires
protecting communities at the greatest risk of health burdens.

61

GOAL

Clean economy

6

MN CLIMATE
ACTION
FRAMEWORK

Build a thriving carbon-neutral economy that produces goods
and services with environmental benefit and equitably provides
family-sustaining job opportunities

SHORT
FORM

Priority
actions

The challenges Minnesota’s economic activity
produces GHG emissions and other air pollutants,
while climate change is threatening jobs and our
economy. Some Minnesotans have limited access
to well-paying careers and the training that allows
entry to career paths that help mitigate and adapt
to climate change. The clean economy future will
require workers, communities, and businesses to
acquire new skills and build resiliency.

Complete a clean economy
workforce and economic
development plan.
Assess high-growth sectors,
potential job losses, and
workforce and skill set needs,
using an inclusive definition
of clean jobs.

The vision Minnesota has a strong economy, aided
by public and private investments in emerging
research, technology, and businesses. Tens of
thousands of people are employed in mitigating
and adapting to climate change. Minnesota
companies sell sustainable products made with
green processes. Labor, businesses, and educational
institutions collaborate to support skills training for
in-demand jobs.

Encourage innovation.
Work with tribal nations,
universities, commercial
consortiums, and private labs
to nurture new technologies
and clean economy
businesses.

Develop worker skills.
Create workforce
strategies that train,
upskill, and reskill workers
to adapt to changing
technologies and job
needs.

62

CLEAN ECONOMY

Priority
actions

Measures
of
progress

GOAL 6

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

Support power-plant
host communities. Assist
communities with aging
fossil fuel-run power plants
to ensure a successful
transition. Provide long-term
planning and support to
retrain workers and promote
economic development.

Identify and remove
barriers to employment
and training for women,
people of color and
individuals with disabilities.
In addition, diversify the
clean economy workforce
in both leadership
positions and frontline
careers.

Assist businesses moving
toward sustainability.
Identify supply chain
needs and support
environmental goals.

In 2023, create a clean
economy workforce and
economic development plan
with trackable metrics.

Increase the number
of apprentices in the
construction trades’
registered apprenticeship
programs and the percentages
of people of color and women
who enroll in and complete
the programs.

Increase jobs in all sectors
of the clean economy,
including new and
emerging sectors such
as land management,
transportation, long-lived
wood products, etc.

Increase the number
of clean technology
businesses and the number
of jobs they provide.

63

CLEAN ECONOMY

GOAL 6

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

CONTEXT
An economy in transition
Climate change is negatively affecting jobs,
natural environments, and our economy.
Customers and businesses are increasingly
asking for energy efficient, lower-carbon
products, and building owners want options to
reduce their carbon footprint and save money.
Businesses need help adapting to remain
competitive. Workers also need support to
transition or retrain to successfully adapt to
new technologies and in-demand job skills.
Several communities host large electric-generating power facilities that
are retiring in the coming years, which will impact jobs, tax base, and
community prosperity.

Clean economy opportunities
Existing careers will be the foundation of a
carbon-neutral economy, many requiring
new skills or functions as they become
more sustainable. Blue-collar work and the
construction industry will be major components.
In energy efficiency, renewable energy, clean
transportation, power grid, and clean fuels
alone Minnesota boasts more than 55,000
jobs — more than a third of which are in
Greater Minnesota —and there are many jobs beyond the energy sectors
that contribute to sustainability. People of color and women are largely
underrepresented in these careers, and employers must address this lack
of diversity. Workforce training for the clean economy should ensure
access by communities disproportionately impacted by climate change
and workers disadvantaged by systemic racism and other barriers.

Adaptation and growth
Minnesota businesses and workers will need more
economic development and training assistance to
power the transition to a clean economy. Business
innovation and entrepreneurship spurs job growth,
and a well-trained workforce is needed to fill
those jobs. The movement towards an inclusive
clean economy is a win-win-win for employees,
consumers, and businesses.

64

CLEAN ECONOMY

GOAL 6

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

WHAT WE WILL DO TOGETHER
Grow clean economy jobs and businesses that provide equitable opportunities for all Minnesotans
Minnesota will support the businesses and workers that are part of the clean economy with training, research, incentives, and partnerships.

Initiative 6.1

Business innovation and entrepreneurship
Invest in research and development, innovation, and partnerships.
 ecome a national leader in clean innovation
B
Attract new industries and innovative thinkers through multi-sector partnerships and technical
and financial support for entrepreneurs. Invest in research and development. Support businesses
owned by women, people of color, veterans, people with disabilities, and others who have historically been left out of investment opportunities.

Initiative 6.2

Equitable access to jobs and a just transition
Support workers to adapt and evolve their skills through inclusive strategies, ensuring
family-sustaining careers.
 upport transitions as industries evolve
S
Plan how to connect people with workforce training and apprenticeship opportunities to prepare
them for the carbon-neutral economy, and gain skills that will adapt to new, cleaner technologies
as they develop. Help workers in declining industries adapt and redevelop their skills. Assist
communities where large power plants will be retired to plan for a prosperous future. Ensure
training and work opportunities are accessible to all. Transition planning and support should
be long-term and take into account the amount of time it may take to train workers, execute
economic development strategies, and other considerations.
Develop career pathways
Outreach, education, and training should lead to employment in clean economy jobs that pay a
family-sustaining wage with skills that can be adapted to new and cleaner technologies as they
develop.

65

CLEAN ECONOMY

GOAL 6

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

 nsure good wages and benefits for workers and address systemic barriers
E
Engage with businesses, educational institutions and policymakers to develop strategies
to ensure jobs provide family-sustaining wages and benefits. Make job opportunities and
training accessible for communities that have faced structural bias and discrimination that are
disproportionately impacted by climate change.

We all have a role
Helping Minnesota’s workforce and businesses to
succeed and transition to a clean economy will require
partnerships across government, unions, industry,
trades, colleges and universities, training programs, and businesses of
all sizes.

Benefits of shared action
Growing clean economy jobs and businesses and
ensuring a just transition have other benefits:
• Vibrant and healthy communities across the state

• Local governments offer incentives for economic development —
and can help link businesses with communities to retain and create
homegrown jobs.

• Reduced income disparities

• Businesses and industry will develop and seek clean technologies,
participate in energy efficiency programs, and optimize supply chain
and production proficiencies.

• More Minnesota workers with
adaptable skills to meet workforce
demand

• More innovative business practices

• Educational institutions and labor training programs can work with
governments and businesses to train Minnesotans for clean economy
jobs that pay family-sustaining wages.

66

CLEAN ECONOMY

GOAL 6

MN CLIMATE ACTION FRAMEWORK

EQUITY
Many clean economy jobs are and will continue to be in the construction trades.
While overall construction jobs tend to provide good wages and benefits, the
industry continues to be dominated by white men. Attracting and retaining
women and people of color in the trades — such as through outreach in schools
career guidance programs to align education and training; safe, hands-on learning
opportunities; mentoring; and financial support during seasonal layoffs — will be
critical to achieving an inclusive and equitable clean economy.
We know that health, environmental, and economic crises disproportionately
affect overburdened communities and can displace workers. Job training and
job placement efforts should focus on reaching communities disproportionately
impacted by climate change and communities that have faced structural bias and
discrimination.
Other key activities will include:
• Ensuring unique regional needs are addressed and there is equitable access to
training.
• Identifying potential high-demand clean economy sectors, and training resources
and needs by region. Targeting training to populations that are underrepresented
in the trades.
• Consulting and coordinating with tribal nations, to support and learn from their
workforce development efforts and clean economy initiatives.
• Exploring the multifaceted opportunities to grow a clean economy with strategies
such as educating consumers on sustainable options.

67

Contributors
Climate Change Subcabinet
Grace Arnold
Nicole Blissenbach
Nancy Daubenberger
Steve Grove
John Harrington
Jennifer Ho
John Jaschke
Margaret Anderson Kelliher
Katrina Kessler
Jan Malcolm
Thom Petersen
Katie Pratt
Alice Roberts-Davis
Roslyn Robertson
Jim Schowalter
Sarah Strommen
Charle Zelle
Governor’s Advisory Council
on Climate Change
Khalif Bashir Ahmed
Mike Birkeland
Christopher Clark
Eric Dayton
Wayne Dupuis
Marco Hernandez
Lucinda Johnson
Alexandra Klass
Patrick Lunemann
Ann Mulholland

Micah Niermann
Kevin Pranis
Hilda Martinez Salgado
Anne Schwagerl
Dave Sunderman
State agencies
Lindsay Anderson
Nora Bateman
Jeff Berg
Kristen Bergstrand
Katherine Blauvelt
Kenneth Blumenfeld
Peter Brickwedde
Levi Brown
Jessica Burdette
Erin Campbell
Peter Ciborowski
Anne Claflin
Peter Clevenstine
Barbara Conti
Kirk Crowshoe
Jennifer Davis
Adway De
Aisha Ellis
Tannie Eshenaur
Tony Fischer
Tom Gile
Michelle Gransee
Marcus Grubbs
Brad Harrington

Greg Hoch
Emily Houser
Anne Hunt
Amanda Jarrett Smith
Gratia Joice
Brad Jordahl Redlin
Megan Kelly
Shannon Kesner
Jack Kluempke
Frank Kohlasch
Faith Krogstad
Amanda Kueper
Lorna LaGue
Kevin Lee
Megan Lennon
Mauricio Leon
Shannon Lotthammer
Marc Majors
Henry McCann
Valerie McClannahan
Craig McDonnell
Kevin McKinnon
Scott McLellan
Jeffrey Meek
Greg Metz
Laura Millberg
Kristin Mroz-Risse
Nancy Omondi
Bob Patton
Kate Perushek
Ann Pierce

Rebecca Place
Laura Preus
Kristin Raab
Aditya Ranade
Heidi Rantala
Suzanne Rhees
Stephan Roos
Jen Schaust
Tim Sexton
Dan Shaw
Beverly Sidlo-Tolliver
Siri Simons
Glenn Skuta
Emily Smoak
Sharon Stephens
Ceil Strauss
Corey Strong
Katherine Teiken
Doug Tillma
Nissa Tupper
Dana Vanderbosch
Andrea Vaubel
David Wall
Helen Waquiu
David Weirens
Maggie Wenger
Natascha Wiener
Eric Wojchik
Editing and design
Paul Andre

Scott Andre
Mary Connor
Kevin Gaffney
Facilitation
Alissa Bemis
Carolyn Berninger
Trevor Drake
Abby Finis
Rebecca Heisel
Brendan Jordan
Rolf Nordstrom
Emma Parkson
Brian Ross
Doug Scott
Kate Sullivan
Mariem Zaghdoudi
Workgroup members
Amira Adawe
Ellen Anderson
MK Anderson
Charles Androsky
Peter Aube
Jennyffer Barrientos
Chris Beach
Colin Beere
Jamie Beyer
Adam Birr
Robert Blake
Eartha Borer-Bell

68

Anne Borgendale
Jim Bowyer
Lindsay J. Brice
Carolyn Brown
LeAnn Buck
Mike Bull
Peter Calow
Ellen Candler
Anna Carlson
Katie Cashman
Diana Chaman Salas
Gabriel Chan
Laura Connelly
Chris Conry
Andrea Crabtree Nayes
Clovis Curl
Joseph Dammel
Troy Daniell
Jen Davis
Angela Dawson
Sharon Delcambre
Kathleen Doran-Norton
Bill Droessler
Tim Dufault
Craig Engwall
James Erkel
Catherine Fair
Abdulahi Farah
Neal Feeken
Sydney Finn
Janne Flisrand
Warren Formo
Erick Francis
Katie Frye
Peg Furshong
Dale Gentry

Jason George
Metric Giles
Elizabeth Glidden
Sarah Goodspeed
Mindy Granley
Blake Grams
Sally Grans Korsh
Bill Grant
Richard Graves
Jason Grenier
Nicole Griensewic
Dorian Grilley
Shannon Guernsey
Todd Guerrero
Bree Halverson
J. Drake Hamilton
Kathy Hartley
Joel Haskard
Erik Hatlestad
Kim W. Havey
Don Hickman
Cheryal Hills
Holly Hinman
Hannah Hoeger
Sara Hollie
Dawn Hood
Rick Horton
Alexa Horwart
Robert Jagusch
Mark Jacobs
Ralph Jacobson
Emily Javens
Craig A. Johnson
Kelsey Johnson
Madi Johnson
Emily Johnston

Katie Jones
Nicholas R. Jordan
Jen Kader
Alexander Kangas
Maggie Karschnia
Tina Koecher
Mark Kulda
Channon Lemon
John Lenczewski
Jane Leonard
Tanessa Lewis
Sydnie Lieb
LeAnn Littlewolf
Lee Lucas
Rhys MacPherson
Sandy Malecha
Marc Majors
Nick Mark
Gregg Mast
Nicholas Martin
Brian Martinson
Jason Metsa
Simeon Matthews
Josiah McClellan
Jess McCullough
John McGuine
Sarah Mooradian
Leslie Moore
Steve Morse
Taj Mustapha
Suzie Nakasian
Randy Neprash
Sadie Neuman
Jed Norgaarden
Michael Northbird
Kimberly Norton

Mari Ojeda
Patty O’Keefe
Melissa Partin
Audrey Partridge
Seth Patterson
John Paulson
David Pelikan
Violet Penman
Abi Phillips
Kristel Porter
Sam Rockwell
Heidi Roop
Steven Rosenzweig
Mary Rothchild
Kateri Routh
Joe Rozza
Nathan Runke
Timothy J. Rudnicki
Eran Sandquist
Lauren Servick
Karin Schaefer
Eric Schenck
Sawyer Scherer
Rhyan Schicker
Shawn Schloesser
Susan Schmidt
Jon Schneider
Emma Schoppe
Laura Schreiber
Kathleen Schuler
Kurt Schultz
Maggie Schuppert
Michelle Shaw
Penny Simonsen
Lucas Sjostrom
Madelyn Smerillo

Ken Smith
Hilarie Sorensen
Russ Stark
John Linc Stine
Shane Stennes
Patrick Stieg
Laura Schreiber
Emma Struss
Lisa Syverson
Jodi Teich
Whitney Terrill
Gary Thaden
Beth Tomlinson
Chad Trebilcock
Aaron Vande Linde
Allison VanDerWal
Analeisha Vang
Josh Vest
Peter Wagenius
Tate Walker
David Wanberg
Anna Wasescha
Maddie Wazowicz
Elizabeth Wefel
Eric Weiss
Patrick Weldon
Angela Williams
Chris Wilson
Amanda Wold
Hli Xyooj
Ansha Zaman
Emily Ziring
Karen Zumach

69

